The Project Gutenberg EBook of Poems & Ballads (First Series), by 
Algernon Charles Swinburne

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Poems & Ballads (First Series)

Author: Algernon Charles Swinburne

Release Date: February 26, 2011 [EBook #35402]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK POEMS & BALLADS (FIRST SERIES) ***




Produced by Paul Murray, Chandra Friend and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









  Poems and Ballads
  First Series

  By
  Algernon Charles Swinburne

  Taken from
  The Collected Poetical Works of Algernon Charles Swinburne--Vol I




  SWINBURNE'S POETICAL WORKS


      I. POEMS AND BALLADS (First Series).

     II. SONGS BEFORE SUNRISE, and SONGS OF TWO NATIONS.

    III. POEMS AND BALLADS (SECOND AND THIRD SERIES), and SONGS OF THE
            SPRING-TIDES.

     IV. TRISTRAM OF LYONESSE, THE TALE OF BALEN, ATALANTA IN CALYDON,
            ERECHTHEUS.

      V. STUDIES IN SONG, A CENTURY OF ROUNDELS, SONNETS ON ENGLISH
            DRAMATIC POETS, THE HEPTALOGIA, ETC.

     VI. A MIDSUMMER HOLIDAY, ASTROPHEL, A CHANNEL PASSAGE AND OTHER
            POEMS.


  London: William Heinemann




  POEMS & BALLADS
  (FIRST SERIES)

  By
  Algernon Charles Swinburne


  1917
  London: William Heinemann

  _First printed_ (_Chatto_), 1904
  _Reprinted_ 1904, '09, '10, '12
  (_Heinemann_), 1917
  _London_: _William Heinemann_ 1917




  TO
  THEODORE WATTS-DUNTON




DEDICATORY EPISTLE


To my best and dearest friend I dedicate the first collected edition of
my poems, and to him I address what I have to say on the occasion.


You will agree with me that it is impossible for any man to undertake
the task of commentary, however brief and succinct, on anything he has
done or tried to do, without incurring the charge of egoism. But there
are two kinds of egoism, the furtive and the frank: and the outspoken
and open-hearted candour of Milton and Wordsworth, Corneille and Hugo,
is not the least or the lightest of their claims to the regard as well
as the respect or the reverence of their readers. Even if I were worthy
to claim kinship with the lowest or with the highest of these deathless
names, I would not seek to shelter myself under the shadow of its
authority. The question would still remain open on all sides. Whether it
is worth while for any man to offer any remarks or for any other man to
read his remarks on his own work, his own ambition, or his own attempts,
he cannot of course determine. If there are great examples of abstinence
from such a doubtful enterprise, there are likewise great examples to
the contrary. As long as the writer can succeed in evading the kindred
charges and the cognate risks of vanity and humility, there can be no
reason why he should not undertake it. And when he has nothing to regret
and nothing to recant, when he finds nothing that he could wish to
cancel, to alter, or to unsay, in any page he has ever laid before his
reader, he need not be seriously troubled by the inevitable
consciousness that the work of his early youth is not and cannot be
unnaturally unlike the work of a very young man. This would be no excuse
for it, if it were in any sense bad work: if it be so, no apology would
avail; and I certainly have none to offer.

It is now thirty-six years since my first volume of miscellaneous verse,
lyrical and dramatic and elegiac and generally heterogeneous, had as
quaint a reception and as singular a fortune as I have ever heard or
read of. I do not think you will differ from my opinion that what is
best in it cannot be divided from what is not so good by any other line
of division than that which marks off mature from immature execution--in
other words, complete from incomplete conception. For its author the
most amusing and satisfying result of the clatter aroused by it was the
deep diversion of collating and comparing the variously inaccurate
verdicts of the scornful or mournful censors who insisted on regarding
all the studies of passion or sensation attempted or achieved in it as
either confessions of positive fact or excursions of absolute fancy.
There are photographs from life in the book; and there are sketches from
imagination. Some which keen-sighted criticism has dismissed with a
smile as ideal or imaginary were as real and actual as they well could
be: others which have been taken for obvious transcripts from memory
were utterly fantastic or dramatic. If the two kinds cannot be
distinguished, it is surely rather a credit than a discredit to an
artist whose medium or material has more in common with a musician's
than with a sculptor's. Friendly and kindly critics, English and
foreign, have detected ignorance of the subject in poems taken straight
from the life, and have protested that they could not believe me were I
to swear that poems entirely or mainly fanciful were not faithful
expressions or transcriptions of the writer's actual experience and
personal emotion. But I need not remind you that all I have to say about
this book was said once for all in the year of its publication: I have
nothing to add to my notes then taken, and I have nothing to retract
from them. To parade or to disclaim experience of passion or of sorrow,
of pleasure or of pain, is the habit and the sign of a school which has
never found a disciple among the better sort of English poets, and which
I know to be no less pitifully contemptible in your opinion than in
mine.

In my next work it should be superfluous to say that there is no touch
of dramatic impersonation or imaginary emotion. The writer of 'Songs
before Sunrise,' from the first line to the last, wrote simply in
submissive obedience to Sir Philip Sidney's precept--'Look in thine
heart, and write.' The dedication of these poems, and the fact that the
dedication was accepted, must be sufficient evidence of this. They do
not pretend and they were never intended to be merely the metrical
echoes, or translations into lyric verse, of another man's doctrine.
Mazzini was no more a Pope or a Dictator than I was a parasite or a
papist. Dictation and inspiration are rather different things. These
poems, and others which followed or preceded them in print, were
inspired by such faith as is born of devotion and reverence: not by such
faith, if faith it may be called, as is synonymous with servility or
compatible with prostration of an abject or wavering spirit and a
submissive or dethroned intelligence. You know that I never pretended to
see eye to eye with my illustrious friends and masters, Victor Hugo and
Giuseppe Mazzini, in regard to the positive and passionate confidence of
their sublime and purified theology. Our betters ought to know better
than we: they would be the last to wish that we should pretend to their
knowledge, or assume a certitude which is theirs and is not ours. But on
one point we surely cannot but be at one with them: that the spirit and
the letter of all other than savage and barbarous religions are
irreconcilably at variance, and that prayer or homage addressed to an
image of our own or of other men's making, be that image avowedly
material or conventionally spiritual, is the affirmation of idolatry
with all its attendant atrocities, and the negation of all belief, all
reverence, and all love, due to the noblest object of human worship that
humanity can realise or conceive. Thus much the exercise of our common
reason might naturally suffice to show us: but when its evidence is
confirmed and fortified by the irrefragable and invariable evidence of
history, there is no room for further dispute or fuller argument on a
subject now visibly beyond reach and eternally beyond need of debate or
demonstration. I know not whether it may or may not be worth while to
add that every passing word I have since thought fit to utter on any
national or political question has been as wholly consistent with the
principles which I then did my best to proclaim and defend as any
apostasy from the faith of all republicans in the fundamental and final
principle of union, voluntary if possible and compulsory if not, would
have been ludicrous in the impudence of its inconsistency with those
simple and irreversible principles. Monarchists and anarchists may be
advocates of national dissolution and reactionary division: republicans
cannot be. The first and last article of their creed is unity: the most
grinding and crushing tyranny of a convention, a directory, or a despot,
is less incompatible with republican faith than the fissiparous
democracy of disunionists or communalists.

If the fortunes of my lyrical work were amusingly eccentric and
accidental, the varieties of opinion which have saluted the appearance
of my plays have been, or have seemed to my humility, even more
diverting and curious. I have been told by reviewers of note and
position that a single one of them is worth all my lyric and otherwise
undramatic achievements or attempts: and I have been told on equal or
similar authority that, whatever I may be in any other field, as a
dramatist I am demonstrably nothing. My first if not my strongest
ambition was to do something worth doing, and not utterly unworthy of a
young countryman of Marlowe the teacher and Webster the pupil of
Shakespeare, in the line of work which those three poets had left as a
possibly unattainable example for ambitious Englishmen. And my first
book, written while yet under academic or tutorial authority, bore
evidence of that ambition in every line. I should be the last to deny
that it also bore evidence of the fact that its writer had no more
notion of dramatic or theatrical construction than the authors of
'Tamburlaine the Great,' 'King Henry VI.,' and 'Sir Thomas Wyatt.' Not
much more, you may possibly say, was discernible in 'Chastelard': a play
also conceived and partly written by a youngster not yet emancipated
from servitude to college rule. I fear that in the former volume there
had been little if any promise of power to grapple with the realities
and subtleties of character and of motive: that whatever may be in it of
promise or of merit must be sought in the language and the style of such
better passages as may perhaps be found in single and separable speeches
of Catherine and of Rosamond. But in 'Chastelard' there are two figures
and a sketch in which I certainly seem to see something of real and
evident life. The sketch of Darnley was afterwards filled out and
finished in the subsequent tragedy of 'Bothwell.' That ambitious,
conscientious, and comprehensive piece of work is of course less
properly definable as a tragedy than by the old Shakespearean term of a
chronicle history. The radical difference between tragic history and
tragedy of either the classic or the romantic order, and consequently
between the laws which govern the one and the principles which guide the
other, you have yourself made clear and familiar to all capable
students. This play of mine was not, I think, inaccurately defined as an
epic drama in the French verses of dedication which were acknowledged by
the greatest of all French poets in a letter from which I dare only
quote one line of Olympian judgment and godlike generosity. 'Occuper ces
deux cimes, cela n'est donné qu'à vous.' Nor will I refrain from the
confession that I cannot think it an epic or a play in which any one
part is sacrificed to any other, any subordinate figure mishandled or
neglected or distorted or effaced for the sake of the predominant and
central person. And, though this has nothing or less than nothing to do
with any question of poetic merit or demerit, of dramatic success or
unsuccess, I will add that I took as much care and pains as though I had
been writing or compiling a history of the period to do loyal justice to
all the historic figures which came within the scope of my dramatic or
poetic design. There is not one which I have designedly altered or
intentionally modified: it is of course for others to decide whether
there is one which is not the living likeness of an actual or imaginable
man.

The third part of this trilogy, as far as I know or remember, found
favour only with the only man in England who could speak on the subject
of historic drama with the authority of an expert and a master. The
generally ungracious reception of 'Mary Stuart' gave me neither surprise
nor disappointment: the cordial approbation or rather the generous
applause of Sir Henry Taylor gave me all and more than all the
satisfaction I could ever have looked for in recompense of as much
painstaking and conscientious though interesting and enjoyable work as
can ever, I should imagine, have been devoted to the completion of any
comparable design. Private and personal appreciation I have always
thought and often found more valuable and delightful than all possible
or imaginable clamour of public praise. This preference will perhaps be
supposed to influence my opinion if I avow that I think I have never
written anything worthier of such reward than the closing tragedy which
may or may not have deserved but which certainly received it.

My first attempt to do something original in English which might in some
degree reproduce for English readers the likeness of a Greek tragedy,
with possibly something more of its true poetic life and charm than
could have been expected from the authors of 'Caractacus' and 'Merope,'
was perhaps too exuberant and effusive in its dialogue, as it certainly
was too irregular in the occasional license of its choral verse, to
accomplish the design or achieve the success which its author should
have aimed at. It may or may not be too long as a poem: it is, I fear,
too long for a poem of the kind to which it belongs or aims at
belonging. Poetical and mathematical truth are so different that I
doubt, however unwilling I may naturally be to doubt, whether it can
truthfully be said of 'Atalanta in Calydon' that the whole is greater
than any part of it. I hope it may be, and I can honestly say no more.
Of 'Erechtheus' I venture to believe with somewhat more confidence that
it can. Either poem, by the natural necessity of its kind and structure,
has its crowning passage or passages which cannot, however much they may
lose by detachment from their context, lose as much as the crowning
scene or scenes of an English or Shakespearean play, as opposed to an
Æschylean or Sophoclean tragedy, must lose and ought to lose by a
similar separation. The two best things in these two Greek plays, the
antiphonal lamentation for the dying Meleager and the choral
presentation of stormy battle between the forces of land and sea, lose
less by such division from the main body of the poem than would those
scenes in 'Bothwell' which deal with the turning-point in the life of
Mary Stuart on the central and conclusive day of Carberry Hill.

It might be thought pedantic or pretentious in a modern poet to divide
his poems after the old Roman fashion into sections and classes; I must
confess that I should like to see this method applied, were it but by
way of experiment in a single edition, to the work of the leading poets
of our own country and century: to see, for instance, their lyrical and
elegiac works ranged and registered apart, each kind in a class of its
own, such as is usually reserved, I know not why, for sonnets only. The
apparent formality of such an arrangement as would give us, for
instance, the odes of Coleridge and Shelley collected into a distinct
reservation or division might possibly be more than compensated to the
more capable among students by the gain in ethical or spiritual symmetry
and æsthetic or intellectual harmony. The ode or hymn--I need remind no
probable reader that the terms are synonymous in the speech of
Pindar--asserts its primacy or pre-eminence over other forms of poetry
in the very name which defines or proclaims it as essentially the song;
as something above all less pure and absolute kinds of song by the very
nature and law of its being. The Greek form, with its regular
arrangement of turn, return, and aftersong, is not to be imitated
because it is Greek, but to be adopted because it is best: the very
best, as a rule, that could be imagined for lyrical expression of the
thing conceived or lyrical aspiration towards the aim imagined. The
rhythmic reason of its rigid but not arbitrary law lies simply and
solely in the charm of its regular variations. This can be given in
English as clearly and fully, if not so sweetly and subtly, as in Greek;
and should, therefore, be expected and required in an English poem of
the same nature and proportion. The Sapphic or Alcaic ode, a simple
sequence of identical stanzas, could be imitated or revived in Latin by
translators or disciples: the scheme of it is exquisitely adequate and
sufficient for comparatively short flights of passion or emotion, ardent
or contemplative and personal or patriotic; but what can be done in
English could not be attempted in Latin. It seems strange to me, our
language being what it is, that our literature should be no richer than
it is in examples of the higher or at least the more capacious and
ambitious kind of ode. Not that the full Pindaric form of threefold or
triune structure need be or should be always adopted: but without an
accurately corresponsive or antiphonal scheme of music even the master
of masters, who is Coleridge, could not produce, even through the superb
and enchanting melodies of such a poem as his 'Dejection,' a fit and
complete companion, a full and perfect rival, to such a poem as his ode
on France.

The title of ode may more properly and fairly be so extended as to cover
all lyrical poems in stanzas or couplets than so strained as to include
a lawless lyric of such irregular and uneven build as Coleridge only and
hardly could make acceptable or admissible among more natural and lawful
forms of poetry. Law, not lawlessness, is the natural condition of
poetic life; but the law must itself be poetic and not pedantic, natural
and not conventional. It would be a trivial precision or restriction
which would refuse the title of ode to the stanzas of Milton or the
heptameters of Aristophanes; that glorious form of lyric verse which a
critic of our own day, as you may not impossibly remember, has likened
with such magnificent felicity of comparison to the gallop of the horses
of the sun. Nor, I presume, should this title be denied to a poem
written in the more modest metre--more modest as being shorter by a
foot--which was chosen for those twin poems of antiphonal correspondence
in subject and in sound, the 'Hymn to Proserpine' and the 'Hymn of Man':
the deathsong of spiritual decadence and the birthsong of spiritual
renascence. Perhaps, too, my first stanzas addressed to Victor Hugo may
be ranked as no less of an ode than that on the insurrection in Candia:
a poem which attracted, whether or not it may have deserved, the notice
and commendation of Mazzini: from whom I received, on the occasion of
its appearance, a letter which was the beginning of my personal
intercourse with the man whom I had always revered above all other men
on earth. But for this happy accident I might not feel disposed to set
much store by my first attempt at a regular ode of orthodox or
legitimate construction; I doubt whether it quite succeeded in evading
the criminal risk and the capital offence of formality; at least until
the change of note in the closing epode gave fuller scope and freer play
of wing to the musical expression. But in my later ode on Athens,
absolutely faithful as it is in form to the strictest type and the most
stringent law of Pindaric hymnology, I venture to believe that there is
no more sign of this infirmity than in the less classically regulated
poem on the Armada; which, though built on a new scheme, is nevertheless
in its way, I think, a legitimate ode, by right of its regularity in
general arrangement of corresponsive divisions. By the test of these two
poems I am content that my claims should be decided and my station
determined as a lyric poet in the higher sense of the term; a craftsman
in the most ambitious line of his art that ever aroused or ever can
arouse the emulous aspiration of his kind.

Even had I ever felt the same impulse to attempt and the same ambition
to achieve the enterprise of epic or narrative that I had always felt
with regard to lyric or dramatic work, I could never have proposed to
myself the lowly and unambitious aim of competition with the work of so
notable a contemporary workman in the humbler branch of that line as
William Morris. No conception could have been further from my mind when
I undertook to rehandle the deathless legend of Tristram than that of so
modest and preposterous a trial of rivalry. My aim was simply to present
that story, not diluted and debased as it had been in our own time by
other hands, but undefaced by improvement and undeformed by
transformation, as it was known to the age of Dante wherever the
chronicles of romance found hearing, from Ercildoune to Florence: and
not in the epic or romantic form of sustained or continuous narrative,
but mainly through a succession of dramatic scenes or pictures with
descriptive settings or backgrounds: the scenes being of the simplest
construction, duologue or monologue, without so much as the classically
permissible intervention of a third or fourth person. It is only in our
native northern form of narrative poetry, on the old and unrivalled
model of the English ballad, that I can claim to have done any work of
the kind worth reference: unless the story of Balen should be considered
as something other than a series or sequence of ballads. A more
plausible objection was brought to bear against 'Tristram of Lyonesse'
than that of failure in an enterprise which I never thought of
undertaking: the objection of an irreconcilable incongruity between the
incidents of the old legend and the meditations on man and nature, life
and death, chance and destiny, assigned to a typical hero of chivalrous
romance. And this objection might be unanswerable if the slightest
attempt had been made to treat the legend as in any possible sense
historical or capable of either rational or ideal association with
history, such as would assimilate the name and fame of Arthur to the
name and fame of any actual and indisputable Alfred or Albert of the
future. But the age when these romances actually lived and flourished
side by side with the reviving legends of Thebes and Troy, not in the
crude and bloodless forms of Celtic and archaic fancy but in the ampler
and manlier developments of Teutonic and mediæval imagination, was the
age of Dante and of Chaucer: an age in which men were only too prone to
waste their time on the twin sciences of astrology and theology, to
expend their energies in the jungle of pseudosophy or the morass of
metaphysics. There is surely nothing more incongruous or anachronic in
the soliloquy of Tristram after his separation from Iseult than in the
lecture of Theseus after the obsequies of Arcite. Both heroes belong to
the same impossible age of an imaginary world: and each has an equal
right, should it so please his chronicler, to reason in the pauses of
action and philosophise in the intervals of adventure. After all, the
active men of the actual age of chivalry were not all of them mere
muscular machines for martial or pacific exercise of their physical
functions or abilities.

You would agree, if the point were worth discussion, that it might
savour somewhat of pretention, if not of affectation, to be over
particular in arrangement of poems according to subject rather than
form, spirit rather than method, or motive rather than execution: and
yet there might be some excuse for the fancy or the pedantry of such a
classification as should set apart, for example, poems inspired by the
influence of places, whether seen but once or familiar for years or
associated with the earliest memories within cognisance or record of the
mind, and poems inspired by the emotions of regard or regret for the
living or the dead; above all, by the rare and profound passion of
reverence and love and faith which labours and rejoices to find
utterance in some tributary sacrifice of song. Mere descriptive poetry
of the prepense and formal kind is exceptionally if not proverbially
liable to incur and to deserve the charge of dullness: it is unnecessary
to emphasise or obtrude the personal note, the presence or the emotion
of a spectator, but it is necessary to make it felt and keep it
perceptible if the poem is to have life in it or even a right to live:
felt as in Wordsworth's work it is always, perceptible as it is always
in Shelley's. This note is more plain and positive than usual in the
poem which attempts--at once a simple and an ambitious attempt--to
render the contrast and the concord of night and day on Loch Torridon:
it is, I think, duly sensible though implicitly subdued in four poems of
the West Undercliff, born or begotten of sunset in the bay and moonlight
on the cliffs, noon or morning in a living and shining garden, afternoon
or twilight on one left flowerless and forsaken. Not to you or any other
poet, nor indeed to the very humblest and simplest lover of poetry, will
it seem incongruous or strange, suggestive of imperfect sympathy with
life or deficient inspiration from nature, that the very words of Sappho
should be heard and recognised in the notes of the nightingales, the
glory of the presence of dead poets imagined in the presence of the
glory of the sky, the lustre of their advent and their passage felt
visible as in vision on the live and limpid floorwork of the cloudless
and sunset-coloured sea. The half-brained creature to whom books are
other than living things may see with the eyes of a bat and draw with
the fingers of a mole his dullard's distinction between books and life:
those who live the fuller life of a higher animal than he know that
books are to poets as much part of that life as pictures are to painters
or as music is to musicians, dead matter though they may be to the
spiritually still-born children of dirt and dullness who find it
possible and natural to live while dead in heart and brain. Marlowe and
Shakespeare, Æschylus and Sappho, do not for us live only on the dusty
shelves of libraries.

It is hardly probable that especial and familiar love of places should
give any special value to verses written under the influence of their
charm: no intimacy of years and no association with the past gave any
colour of emotion to many other studies of English land and sea which
certainly are no less faithful and possibly have no less spiritual or
poetic life in them than the four to which I have just referred, whose
localities lie all within the boundary of a mile or so. No contrast
could be stronger than that between the majestic and exquisite glory of
cliff and crag, lawn and woodland, garden and lea, to which I have done
homage though assuredly I have not done justice in these four poems--'In
the Bay,' 'On the Cliffs,' 'A Forsaken Garden,' the dedication of 'The
Sisters'--and the dreary beauty, inhuman if not unearthly in its
desolation, of the innumerable creeks and inlets, lined and paven with
sea-flowers, which make of the salt marshes a fit and funereal setting,
a fatal and appropriate foreground, for the supreme desolation of the
relics of Dunwich; the beautiful and awful solitude of a wilderness on
which the sea has forbidden man to build or live, overtopped and bounded
by the tragic and ghastly solitude of a headland on which the sea has
forbidden the works of human charity and piety to survive: between the
dense and sand-encumbered tides which are eating the desecrated wreck
and ruin of them all away, and the matchless magic, the ineffable
fascination of the sea whose beauties and delights, whose translucent
depths of water and divers-coloured banks of submarine foliage and
flowerage, but faintly reflected in the stanzas of the little ode 'Off
Shore,' complete the charm of the scenes as faintly sketched or shadowed
forth in the poems just named, or the sterner and stranger magic of the
seaboard to which tribute was paid in 'An Autumn Vision,' 'A Swimmer's
Dream,' 'On the South Coast,' 'Neap-tide': or, again, between the
sterile stretches and sad limitless outlook of the shore which faces a
hitherto undetermined and interminable sea, and the joyful and fateful
beauty of the seas off Bamborough and the seas about Sark and Guernsey.
But if there is enough of the human or personal note to bring into touch
the various poems which deal with these various impressions, there may
perhaps be no less of it discernible in such as try to render the effect
of inland or woodland solitude--the splendid oppression of nature at
noon which found utterance of old in words of such singular and
everlasting significance as panic and nympholepsy.

The retrospect across many years over the many eulogistic and elegiac
poems which I have inscribed or devoted to the commemoration or the
panegyric of the living or the dead has this in it of pride and
pleasure, that I find little to recant and nothing to repent on
reconsideration of them all. If ever a word of tributary thanksgiving
for the delight and the benefit of loyal admiration evoked in the spirit
of a boy or aroused in the intelligence of a man may seem to exceed the
limit of demonstrable accuracy, I have no apology to offer for any such
aberration from the safe path of tepid praise or conventional applause.
I can truly say with Shelley that I have been fortunate in friendships:
I might add if I cared, as he if he had cared might have added, that I
have been no less fortunate in my enemies than in my friends; and this,
though by comparison a matter of ineffable insignificance, can hardly be
to any rational and right-minded man a matter of positive indifference.
Rather should it be always a subject for thankfulness and
self-congratulation if a man can honestly and reasonably feel assured
that his friends and foes alike have been always and at almost all
points the very men he would have chosen, had choice and foresight been
allowed him, at the very outset of his career in life. I should never,
when a boy, have dared to dream that as a man I might possibly be
admitted to the personal acquaintance of the three living gods, I do not
say of my idolatry, for idolatry is a term inapplicable where the gods
are real and true, but of my whole-souled and single-hearted worship:
and yet, when writing of Landor, of Mazzini, and of Hugo, I write of men
who have honoured me with the assurance and the evidence of their
cordial and affectionate regard. However inadequate and unworthy may be
my tribute to their glory when living and their memory when dead, it is
that of one whose gratitude and devotion found unforgettable favour in
their sight. And I must be allowed to add that the redeeming quality of
entire and absolute sincerity may be claimed on behalf of every line I
have written in honour of friends, acquaintances, or strangers. My
tribute to Richard Burton was not more genuine in its expression than my
tribute to Christina Rossetti. Two noble human creatures more utterly
unlike each other it would be unspeakably impossible to conceive; but it
was as simply natural for one who honoured them both to do honest
homage, before and after they had left us, to the saintly and secluded
poetess as to the adventurous and unsaintly hero. Wherever anything is
worthy of honour and thanksgiving it is or it always should be as
natural if not as delightful to give thanks and do honour to a stranger
as to a friend, to a benefactor long since dead as to a benefactor still
alive. To the kindred spirits of Philip Sidney and Aurelio Saffi it was
almost as equal a pleasure to offer what tribute I could bring as if
Sidney also could have honoured me with his personal friendship. To
Tennyson and Browning it was no less fit that I should give honour than
that I should do homage to the memory of Bruno, the martyred friend of
Sidney. And I can hardly remember any task that I ever took more delight
in discharging than I felt in the inadequate and partial payment of a
lifelong debt to the marvellous and matchless succession of poets who
made the glory of our country incomparable for ever by the work they did
between the joyful date of the rout of the Armada and the woful date of
the outbreak of civil war.

Charles Lamb, as I need not remind you, wrote for antiquity: nor need
you be assured that when I write plays it is with a view to their being
acted at the Globe, the Red Bull, or the Black Friars. And whatever may
be the dramatic or other defects of 'Marino Faliero' or 'Locrine,' they
do certainly bear the same relation to previous plays or attempts at
plays on the same subjects as 'King Henry V.' to 'The Famous
Victories'--if not as 'King Lear,' a poem beyond comparison with all
other works of man except possibly 'Prometheus' and 'Othello,' to the
primitive and infantile scrawl or drivel of 'King Leir and his three
daughters.' The fifth act of 'Marino Faliero,' hopelessly impossible as
it is from the point of view of modern stagecraft, could hardly have
been found too untheatrical, too utterly given over to talk without
action, by the audiences which endured and applauded the magnificent
monotony of Chapman's eloquence--the fervent and inexhaustible
declamation which was offered and accepted as a substitute for study of
character and interest of action when his two finest plays, if plays
they can be called, found favour with an incredibly intelligent and an
inconceivably tolerant audience. The metrical or executive experiment
attempted and carried through in 'Locrine' would have been improper to
any but a purely and wholly romantic play or poem: I do not think that
the life of human character or the lifelikeness of dramatic dialogue has
suffered from the bondage of rhyme or has been sacrificed to the
exigence of metre. The tragedy of 'The Sisters,' however defective it
may be in theatrical interest or progressive action, is the only modern
English play I know in which realism in the reproduction of natural
dialogue and accuracy in the representation of natural intercourse
between men and women of gentle birth and breeding have been found or
made compatible with expression in genuine if simple blank verse. It is
not for me to decide whether anything in the figures which play their
parts on my imaginary though realistic stage may be worthy of sympathy,
attention, or interest: but I think they talk and act as they would have
done in life without ever lapsing into platitude or breaking out of
nature.

In 'Rosamund, Queen of the Lombards,' I took up a subject long since
mishandled by an English dramatist of all but the highest rank, and one
which in later days Alfieri had commemorated in a magnificent passage of
a wholly unhistoric and somewhat unsatisfactory play. The comparatively
slight deviation from historic records in the final catastrophe or
consummation of mine is not, I think, to say the least, injurious to the
tragic effect or the moral interest of the story.

A writer conscious of any natural command over the musical resources of
his language can hardly fail to take such pleasure in the enjoyment of
this gift or instinct as the greatest writer and the greatest versifier
of our age must have felt at its highest possible degree when composing
a musical exercise of such incomparable scope and fullness as 'Les
Djinns.' But if he be a poet after the order of Hugo or Coleridge or
Shelley, the result will be something very much more than a musical
exercise; though indeed, except to such ears as should always be kept
closed against poetry, there is no music in verse which has not in it
sufficient fullness and ripeness of meaning, sufficient adequacy of
emotion or of thought, to abide the analysis of any other than the
purblind scrutiny of prepossession or the squint-eyed inspection of
malignity. There may perhaps be somewhat more depth and variety of
feeling or reflection condensed into the narrow frame of the poems which
compose 'A Century of Roundels' than would be needed to fulfil the epic
vacuity of a Choerilus or a Coluthus. And the form chosen for my only
narrative poem was chosen as a test of the truth of my conviction that
such work could be done better on the straitest and the strictest
principles of verse than on the looser and more slippery lines of
mediæval or modern improvisation. The impulsive and irregular verse
which had been held sufficient for the stanza selected or accepted by
Thornton and by Tennyson seemed capable of improvement and invigoration
as a vehicle or a medium for poetic narrative. And I think it has not
been found unfit to give something of dignity as well as facility to a
narrative which recasts in modern English verse one of the noblest and
loveliest old English legends. There is no episode in the cycle of
Arthurian romance more genuinely Homeric in its sublime simplicity and
its pathetic sublimity of submission to the masterdom of fate than that
which I have rather reproduced than recast in 'The Tale of Balen': and
impossible as it is to render the text or express the spirit of the
Iliad in English prose or rhyme--above all, in English blank verse--it
is possible, in such a metre as was chosen and refashioned for this
poem, to give some sense of the rage and rapture of battle for which
Homer himself could only find fit and full expression by similitudes
drawn like mine from the revels and the terrors and the glories of the
sea.

It is nothing to me that what I write should find immediate or general
acceptance: it is much to know that on the whole it has won for me the
right to address this dedication and inscribe this edition to you.

                                         ALGERNON CHARLES SWINBURNE.




POEMS AND BALLADS




TO

MY FRIEND

EDWARD BURNE JONES

THESE POEMS

ARE AFFECTIONATELY AND ADMIRINGLY

DEDICATED




CONTENTS

POEMS AND BALLADS


                                            PAGE
    A BALLAD OF LIFE                           1
    A BALLAD OF DEATH                          4
    LAUS VENERIS                              11
    PHÆDRA                                    27
    THE TRIUMPH OF TIME                       34
    LES NOYADES                               48
    A LEAVE-TAKING                            52
    ITYLUS                                    54
    ANACTORIA                                 57
    HYMN TO PROSERPINE                        67
    ILICET                                    74
    HERMAPHRODITUS                            79
    FRAGOLETTA                                82
    RONDEL                                    85
    SATIA TE SANGUINE                         87
    A LITANY                                  89
    A LAMENTATION                             95
    ANIMA ANCEPS                             100
    IN THE ORCHARD                           102
    A MATCH                                  104
    FAUSTINE                                 106
    A CAMEO                                  113
    SONG BEFORE DEATH                        114
    ROCOCO                                   115
    STAGE LOVE                               118
    THE LEPER                                119
    A BALLAD OF BURDENS                      125
    RONDEL                                   128
    BEFORE THE MIRROR                        129
    EROTION                                  132
    IN MEMORY OF WALTER SAVAGE LANDOR        134
    A SONG IN TIME OF ORDER. 1852            137
    A SONG IN TIME OF REVOLUTION. 1860.      140
    TO VICTOR HUGO                           144
    BEFORE DAWN                              151
    DOLORES                                  154
    THE GARDEN OF PROSERPINE                 169
    HESPERIA                                 173
    LOVE AT SEA                              179
    APRIL                                    181
    BEFORE PARTING                           184
    THE SUNDEW                               186
    FÉLISE                                   188
    AN INTERLUDE                             199
    HENDECASYLLABICS                         202
    SAPPHICS                                 204
    AT ELEUSIS                               208
    AUGUST                                   215
    A CHRISTMAS CAROL                        218
    THE MASQUE OF QUEEN BERSABE              221
    ST. DOROTHY                              237
    THE TWO DREAMS                           252
    AHOLIBAH                                 266
    LOVE AND SLEEP                           272
    MADONNA MIA                              273
    THE KING'S DAUGHTER                      276
    AFTER DEATH                              279
    MAY JANET                                282
    THE BLOODY SON                           284
    THE SEA-SWALLOWS                         288
    THE YEAR OF LOVE                         291
    DEDICATION, 1865                         293




A BALLAD OF LIFE


  I found in dreams a place of wind and flowers,
    Full of sweet trees and colour of glad grass,
    In midst whereof there was
  A lady clothed like summer with sweet hours.
  Her beauty, fervent as a fiery moon,
    Made my blood burn and swoon
      Like a flame rained upon.
  Sorrow had filled her shaken eyelids' blue,
  And her mouth's sad red heavy rose all through
      Seemed sad with glad things gone.

  She held a little cithern by the strings,
    Shaped heartwise, strung with subtle-coloured hair
    Of some dead lute-player
  That in dead years had done delicious things.
  The seven strings were named accordingly;
    The first string charity,
      The second tenderness,
  The rest were pleasure, sorrow, sleep, and sin,
  And loving-kindness, that is pity's kin
      And is most pitiless.

  There were three men with her, each garmented
    With gold and shod with gold upon the feet;
    And with plucked ears of wheat
  The first man's hair was wound upon his head:
  His face was red, and his mouth curled and sad;
    All his gold garment had
      Pale stains of dust and rust.
  A riven hood was pulled across his eyes;
  The token of him being upon this wise
      Made for a sign of Lust.

  The next was Shame, with hollow heavy face
    Coloured like green wood when flame kindles it.
    He hath such feeble feet
  They may not well endure in any place.
  His face was full of grey old miseries,
    And all his blood's increase
      Was even increase of pain.
  The last was Fear, that is akin to Death;
  He is Shame's friend, and always as Shame saith
      Fear answers him again.

  My soul said in me; This is marvellous,
    Seeing the air's face is not so delicate
    Nor the sun's grace so great,
  If sin and she be kin or amorous.
  And seeing where maidens served her on their knees,
    I bade one crave of these
      To know the cause thereof.
  Then Fear said: I am Pity that was dead.
  And Shame said: I am Sorrow comforted.
      And Lust said: I am Love.

  Thereat her hands began a lute-playing
    And her sweet mouth a song in a strange tongue;
    And all the while she sung
  There was no sound but long tears following
  Long tears upon men's faces, waxen white
    With extreme sad delight.
      But those three following men
  Became as men raised up among the dead;
  Great glad mouths open and fair cheeks made red
      With child's blood come again.

  Then I said: Now assuredly I see
    My lady is perfect, and transfigureth
    All sin and sorrow and death,
  Making them fair as her own eyelids be,
  Or lips wherein my whole soul's life abides;
    Or as her sweet white sides
      And bosom carved to kiss.
  Now therefore, if her pity further me,
  Doubtless for her sake all my days shall be
      As righteous as she is.

  Forth, ballad, and take roses in both arms,
    Even till the top rose touch thee in the throat
  Where the least thornprick harms;
    And girdled in thy golden singing-coat,
  Come thou before my lady and say this;
    Borgia, thy gold hair's colour burns in me,
      Thy mouth makes beat my blood in feverish rhymes;
    Therefore so many as these roses be,
      Kiss me so many times.
  Then it may be, seeing how sweet she is,
    That she will stoop herself none otherwise
      Than a blown vine-branch doth,
    And kiss thee with soft laughter on thine eyes,
      Ballad, and on thy mouth.




A BALLAD OF DEATH


  Kneel down, fair Love, and fill thyself with tears,
  Girdle thyself with sighing for a girth
  Upon the sides of mirth,
  Cover thy lips and eyelids, let thine ears
  Be filled with rumour of people sorrowing;
  Make thee soft raiment out of woven sighs
  Upon the flesh to cleave,
  Set pains therein and many a grievous thing,
  And many sorrows after each his wise
  For armlet and for gorget and for sleeve.

  O Love's lute heard about the lands of death,
  Left hanged upon the trees that were therein;
  O Love and Time and Sin,
  Three singing mouths that mourn now underbreath,
  Three lovers, each one evil spoken of;
  O smitten lips wherethrough this voice of mine
  Came softer with her praise;
  Abide a little for our lady's love.
  The kisses of her mouth were more than wine,
  And more than peace the passage of her days.

  O Love, thou knowest if she were good to see.
  O Time, thou shalt not find in any land
  Till, cast out of thine hand,
  The sunlight and the moonlight fail from thee,
  Another woman fashioned like as this.
  O Sin, thou knowest that all thy shame in her
  Was made a goodly thing;
  Yea, she caught Shame and shamed him with her kiss,
  With her fair kiss, and lips much lovelier
  Than lips of amorous roses in late spring.

  By night there stood over against my bed
  Queen Venus with a hood striped gold and black,
  Both sides drawn fully back
  From brows wherein the sad blood failed of red,
  And temples drained of purple and full of death.
  Her curled hair had the wave of sea-water
  And the sea's gold in it.
  Her eyes were as a dove's that sickeneth.
  Strewn dust of gold she had shed over her,
  And pearl and purple and amber on her feet.

  Upon her raiment of dyed sendaline
  Were painted all the secret ways of love
  And covered things thereof,
  That hold delight as grape-flowers hold their wine;
  Red mouths of maidens and red feet of doves,
  And brides that kept within the bride-chamber
  Their garment of soft shame,
  And weeping faces of the wearied loves
  That swoon in sleep and awake wearier,
  With heat of lips and hair shed out like flame.

  The tears that through her eyelids fell on me
  Made mine own bitter where they ran between
  As blood had fallen therein,
  She saying; Arise, lift up thine eyes and see
  If any glad thing be or any good
  Now the best thing is taken forth of us;
  Even she to whom all praise
  Was as one flower in a great multitude,
  One glorious flower of many and glorious,
  One day found gracious among many days:

  Even she whose handmaiden was Love--to whom
  At kissing times across her stateliest bed
  Kings bowed themselves and shed
  Pale wine, and honey with the honeycomb,
  And spikenard bruised for a burnt-offering;
  Even she between whose lips the kiss became
  As fire and frankincense;
  Whose hair was as gold raiment on a king,
  Whose eyes were as the morning purged with flame,
  Whose eyelids as sweet savour issuing thence.

  Then I beheld, and lo on the other side
  My lady's likeness crowned and robed and dead.
  Sweet still, but now not red,
  Was the shut mouth whereby men lived and died.
  And sweet, but emptied of the blood's blue shade,
  The great curled eyelids that withheld her eyes.
  And sweet, but like spoilt gold,
  The weight of colour in her tresses weighed.
  And sweet, but as a vesture with new dyes,
  The body that was clothed with love of old.

  Ah! that my tears filled all her woven hair
  And all the hollow bosom of her gown--
  Ah! that my tears ran down
  Even to the place where many kisses were,
  Even where her parted breast-flowers have place,
  Even where they are cloven apart--who knows not this?
  Ah! the flowers cleave apart
  And their sweet fills the tender interspace;
  Ah! the leaves grown thereof were things to kiss
  Ere their fine gold was tarnished at the heart.

  Ah! in the days when God did good to me,
  Each part about her was a righteous thing;
  Her mouth an almsgiving,
  The glory of her garments charity,
  The beauty of her bosom a good deed,
  In the good days when God kept sight of us;
  Love lay upon her eyes,
  And on that hair whereof the world takes heed;
  And all her body was more virtuous
  Than souls of women fashioned otherwise.

  Now, ballad, gather poppies in thine hands
  And sheaves of brier and many rusted sheaves
  Rain-rotten in rank lands,
  Waste marigold and late unhappy leaves
  And grass that fades ere any of it be mown;
  And when thy bosom is filled full thereof
  Seek out Death's face ere the light altereth,
  And say "My master that was thrall to Love
  Is become thrall to Death."
  Bow down before him, ballad, sigh and groan,
  But make no sojourn in thy outgoing;
  For haply it may be
  That when thy feet return at evening
  Death shall come in with thee.




LAUS VENERIS


Lors dit en plourant; Hélas trop malheureux homme et mauldict pescheur,
oncques ne verrai-je clémence et miséricorde de Dieu. Ores m'en irai-je
d'icy et me cacherai dedans le mont Horsel, en requérant de faveur et
d'amoureuse merci ma doulce dame Vénus, car pour son amour serai-je bien
à tout jamais damné en enfer. Voicy la fin de tous mes faicts d'armes et
de toutes mes belles chansons. Hélas, trop belle estoyt la face de ma
dame et ses yeulx, et en mauvais jour je vis ces chouses-là. Lors s'en
alla tout en gémissant et se retourna chez elle, et là vescut tristement
en grand amour près de sa dame. Puis après advint que le pape vit un
jour esclater sur son baston force belles fleurs rouges et blanches et
maints boutons de feuilles, et ainsi vit-il reverdir toute l'escorce. Ce
dont il eut grande crainte et moult s'en esmut, et grande pitié lui prit
de ce chevalier qui s'en estoyt départi sans espoir comme un homme
misérable et damné. Doncques envoya force messaigers devers luy pour le
ramener, disant qu'il aurait de Dieu grace et bonne absolution de son
grand pesché d'amour. Mais oncques plus ne le virent; car toujours
demeura ce pauvre chevalier auprès de Vénus la haulte et forte déesse ès
flancs de la montagne amoureuse.

                 _Livre des grandes merveilles d'amour, escript en latin
                      et en françoys par Maistre Antoine Gaget._ 1530.


LAUS VENERIS


  Asleep or waking is it? for her neck,
  Kissed over close, wears yet a purple speck
    Wherein the pained blood falters and goes out;
  Soft, and stung softly--fairer for a fleck.

  But though my lips shut sucking on the place,
  There is no vein at work upon her face;
    Her eyelids are so peaceable, no doubt
  Deep sleep has warmed her blood through all its ways.

  Lo, this is she that was the world's delight;
  The old grey years were parcels of her might;
    The strewings of the ways wherein she trod
  Were the twain seasons of the day and night.

  Lo, she was thus when her clear limbs enticed
  All lips that now grow sad with kissing Christ,
    Stained with blood fallen from the feet of God,
  The feet and hands whereat our souls were priced.

  Alas, Lord, surely thou art great and fair.
  But lo her wonderfully woven hair!
    And thou didst heal us with thy piteous kiss;
  But see now, Lord; her mouth is lovelier.

  She is right fair; what hath she done to thee?
  Nay, fair Lord Christ, lift up thine eyes and see;
    Had now thy mother such a lip--like this?
  Thou knowest how sweet a thing it is to me.

  Inside the Horsel here the air is hot;
  Right little peace one hath for it, God wot;
    The scented dusty daylight burns the air,
  And my heart chokes me till I hear it not.

  Behold, my Venus, my soul's body, lies
  With my love laid upon her garment-wise,
    Feeling my love in all her limbs and hair
  And shed between her eyelids through her eyes.

  She holds my heart in her sweet open hands
  Hanging asleep; hard by her head there stands,
    Crowned with gilt thorns and clothed with flesh like fire,
  Love, wan as foam blown up the salt burnt sands--

  Hot as the brackish waifs of yellow spume
  That shift and steam--loose clots of arid fume
    From the sea's panting mouth of dry desire;
  There stands he, like one labouring at a loom.

  The warp holds fast across; and every thread
  That makes the woof up has dry specks of red;
    Always the shuttle cleaves clean through, and he
  Weaves with the hair of many a ruined head.

  Love is not glad nor sorry, as I deem;
  Labouring he dreams, and labours in the dream,
    Till when the spool is finished, lo I see
  His web, reeled off, curls and goes out like steam.

  Night falls like fire; the heavy lights run low,
  And as they drop, my blood and body so
    Shake as the flame shakes, full of days and hours
  That sleep not neither weep they as they go.

  Ah yet would God this flesh of mine might be
  Where air might wash and long leaves cover me,
    Where tides of grass break into foam of flowers,
  Or where the wind's feet shine along the sea.

  Ah yet would God that stems and roots were bred
  Out of my weary body and my head,
    That sleep were sealed upon me with a seal,
  And I were as the least of all his dead.

  Would God my blood were dew to feed the grass,
  Mine ears made deaf and mine eyes blind as glass,
    My body broken as a turning wheel,
  And my mouth stricken ere it saith Alas!

  Ah God, that love were as a flower or flame,
  That life were as the naming of a name,
    That death were not more pitiful than desire,
  That these things were not one thing and the same!

  Behold now, surely somewhere there is death:
  For each man hath some space of years, he saith,
    A little space of time ere time expire,
  A little day, a little way of breath.

  And lo, between the sundawn and the sun,
  His day's work and his night's work are undone;
    And lo, between the nightfall and the light,
  He is not, and none knoweth of such an one.

  Ah God, that I were as all souls that be,
  As any herb or leaf of any tree,
    As men that toil through hours of labouring night,
  As bones of men under the deep sharp sea.

  Outside it must be winter among men;
  For at the gold bars of the gates again
    I heard all night and all the hours of it
  The wind's wet wings and fingers drip with rain.

  Knights gather, riding sharp for cold; I know
  The ways and woods are strangled with the snow;
    And with short song the maidens spin and sit
  Until Christ's birthnight, lily-like, arow.

  The scent and shadow shed about me make
  The very soul in all my senses ache;
    The hot hard night is fed upon my breath,
  And sleep beholds me from afar awake.

  Alas, but surely where the hills grow deep,
  Or where the wild ways of the sea are steep,
    Or in strange places somewhere there is death,
  And on death's face the scattered hair of sleep.

  There lover-like with lips and limbs that meet
  They lie, they pluck sweet fruit of life and eat;
    But me the hot and hungry days devour,
  And in my mouth no fruit of theirs is sweet.

  No fruit of theirs, but fruit of my desire,
  For her love's sake whose lips through mine respire;
    Her eyelids on her eyes like flower on flower,
  Mine eyelids on mine eyes like fire on fire.

  So lie we, not as sleep that lies by death,
  With heavy kisses and with happy breath;
    Not as man lies by woman, when the bride
  Laughs low for love's sake and the words he saith.

  For she lies, laughing low with love; she lies
  And turns his kisses on her lips to sighs,
    To sighing sound of lips unsatisfied,
  And the sweet tears are tender with her eyes.

  Ah, not as they, but as the souls that were
  Slain in the old time, having found her fair;
    Who, sleeping with her lips upon their eyes,
  Heard sudden serpents hiss across her hair.

  Their blood runs round the roots of time like rain:
  She casts them forth and gathers them again;
    With nerve and bone she weaves and multiplies
  Exceeding pleasure out of extreme pain.

  Her little chambers drip with flower-like red,
  Her girdles, and the chaplets of her head,
    Her armlets and her anklets; with her feet
  She tramples all that winepress of the dead.

  Her gateways smoke with fume of flowers and fires,
  With loves burnt out and unassuaged desires;
    Between her lips the steam of them is sweet,
  The languor in her ears of many lyres.

  Her beds are full of perfume and sad sound,
  Her doors are made with music, and barred round
    With sighing and with laughter and with tears,
  With tears whereby strong souls of men are bound.

  There is the knight Adonis that was slain;
  With flesh and blood she chains him for a chain;
    The body and the spirit in her ears
  Cry, for her lips divide him vein by vein.

  Yea, all she slayeth; yea, every man save me;
  Me, love, thy lover that must cleave to thee
    Till the ending of the days and ways of earth,
  The shaking of the sources of the sea.

  Me, most forsaken of all souls that fell;
  Me, satiated with things insatiable;
    Me, for whose sake the extreme hell makes mirth,
  Yea, laughter kindles at the heart of hell.

  Alas thy beauty! for thy mouth's sweet sake
  My soul is bitter to me, my limbs quake
    As water, as the flesh of men that weep,
  As their heart's vein whose heart goes nigh to break.

  Ah God, that sleep with flower-sweet finger-tips
  Would crush the fruit of death upon my lips;
    Ah God, that death would tread the grapes of sleep
  And wring their juice upon me as it drips.

  There is no change of cheer for many days,
  But change of chimes high up in the air, that sways
    Rung by the running fingers of the wind;
  And singing sorrows heard on hidden ways.

  Day smiteth day in twain, night sundereth night,
  And on mine eyes the dark sits as the light;
    Yea, Lord, thou knowest I know not, having sinned,
  If heaven be clean or unclean in thy sight.

  Yea, as if earth were sprinkled over me,
  Such chafed harsh earth as chokes a sandy sea,
    Each pore doth yearn, and the dried blood thereof
  Gasps by sick fits, my heart swims heavily,

  There is a feverish famine in my veins;
  Below her bosom, where a crushed grape stains
    The white and blue, there my lips caught and clove
  An hour since, and what mark of me remains?

  I dare not always touch her, lest the kiss
  Leave my lips charred. Yea, Lord, a little bliss,
    Brief bitter bliss, one hath for a great sin;
  Nathless thou knowest how sweet a thing it is.

  Sin, is it sin whereby men's souls are thrust
  Into the pit? yet had I a good trust
    To save my soul before it slipped therein,
  Trod under by the fire-shod feet of lust.

  For if mine eyes fail and my soul takes breath,
  I look between the iron sides of death
    Into sad hell where all sweet love hath end,
  All but the pain that never finisheth.

  There are the naked faces of great kings,
  The singing folk with all their lute-playings;
    There when one cometh he shall have to friend
  The grave that covets and the worm that clings.

  There sit the knights that were so great of hand,
  The ladies that were queens of fair green land,
    Grown grey and black now, brought unto the dust,
  Soiled, without raiment, clad about with sand.

  There is one end for all of them; they sit
  Naked and sad, they drink the dregs of it,
    Trodden as grapes in the wine-press of lust.
  Trampled and trodden by the fiery feet.

  I see the marvellous mouth whereby there fell
  Cities and people whom the gods loved well,
    Yet for her sake on them the fire gat hold,
  And for their sakes on her the fire of hell.

  And softer than the Egyptian lote-leaf is,
  The queen whose face was worth the world to kiss,
    Wearing at breast a suckling snake of gold;
  And large pale lips of strong Semiramis,

  Curled like a tiger's that curl back to feed;
  Red only where the last kiss made them bleed;
    Her hair most thick with many a carven gem,
  Deep in the mane, great-chested, like a steed.

  Yea, with red sin the faces of them shine;
  But in all these there was no sin like mine;
    No, not in all the strange great sins of them
  That made the wine-press froth and foam with wine.

  For I was of Christ's choosing, I God's knight,
  No blinkard heathen stumbling for scant light;
    I can well see, for all the dusty days
  Gone past, the clean great time of goodly fight.

  I smell the breathing battle sharp with blows,
  With shriek of shafts and snapping short of bows;
    The fair pure sword smites out in subtle ways,
  Sounds and long lights are shed between the rows

  Of beautiful mailed men; the edged light slips,
  Most like a snake that takes short breath and dips
    Sharp from the beautifully bending head,
  With all its gracious body lithe as lips

  That curl in touching you; right in this wise
  My sword doth, seeming fire in mine own eyes,
    Leaving all colours in them brown and red
  And flecked with death; then the keen breaths like sighs,

  The caught-up choked dry laughters following them,
  When all the fighting face is grown a flame
    For pleasure, and the pulse that stuns the ears,
  And the heart's gladness of the goodly game.

  Let me think yet a little; I do know
  These things were sweet, but sweet such years ago,
    Their savour is all turned now into tears;
  Yea, ten years since, where the blue ripples blow,

  The blue curled eddies of the blowing Rhine,
  I felt the sharp wind shaking grass and vine
    Touch my blood too, and sting me with delight
  Through all this waste and weary body of mine

  That never feels clear air; right gladly then
  I rode alone, a great way off my men,
    And heard the chiming bridle smite and smite,
  And gave each rhyme thereof some rhyme again,

  Till my song shifted to that iron one;
  Seeing there rode up between me and the sun
    Some certain of my foe's men, for his three
  White wolves across their painted coats did run.

  The first red-bearded, with square cheeks--alack,
  I made my knave's blood turn his beard to black;
    The slaying of him was a joy to see:
  Perchance too, when at night he came not back,

  Some woman fell a-weeping, whom this thief
  Would beat when he had drunken; yet small grief
    Hath any for the ridding of such knaves;
  Yea, if one wept, I doubt her teen was brief.

  This bitter love is sorrow in all lands,
  Draining of eyelids, wringing of drenched hands,
    Sighing of hearts and filling up of graves;
  A sign across the head of the world he stands,

  An one that hath a plague-mark on his brows;
  Dust and spilt blood do track him to his house
    Down under earth; sweet smells of lip and cheek,
  Like a sweet snake's breath made more poisonous

  With chewing of some perfumed deadly grass,
  Are shed all round his passage if he pass,
    And their quenched savour leaves the whole soul weak,
  Sick with keen guessing whence the perfume was.

  As one who hidden in deep sedge and reeds
  Smells the rare scent made where a panther feeds,
    And tracking ever slotwise the warm smell
  Is snapped upon by the sweet mouth and bleeds,

  His head far down the hot sweet throat of her--
  So one tracks love, whose breath is deadlier,
    And lo, one springe and you are fast in hell,
  Fast as the gin's grip of a wayfarer.

  I think now, as the heavy hours decease
  One after one, and bitter thoughts increase
    One upon one, of all sweet finished things;
  The breaking of the battle; the long peace

  Wherein we sat clothed softly, each man's hair
  Crowned with green leaves beneath white hoods of vair;
    The sounds of sharp spears at great tourneyings,
  And noise of singing in the late sweet air.

  I sang of love too, knowing nought thereof;
  "Sweeter," I said, "the little laugh of love
    Than tears out of the eyes of Magdalen,
  Or any fallen feather of the Dove.

  "The broken little laugh that spoils a kiss,
  The ache of purple pulses, and the bliss
    Of blinded eyelids that expand again--
  Love draws them open with those lips of his,

  "Lips that cling hard till the kissed face has grown
  Of one same fire and colour with their own;
    Then ere one sleep, appeased with sacrifice,
  Where his lips wounded, there his lips atone."

  I sang these things long since and knew them not;
  "Lo, here is love, or there is love, God wot,
    This man and that finds favour in his eyes,"
  I said, "but I, what guerdon have I got?

  "The dust of praise that is blown everywhere
  In all men's faces with the common air;
    The bay-leaf that wants chafing to be sweet
  Before they wind it in a singer's hair."

  So that one dawn I rode forth sorrowing;
  I had no hope but of some evil thing,
    And so rode slowly past the windy wheat
  And past the vineyard and the water-spring,

  Up to the Horsel. A great elder-tree
  Held back its heaps of flowers to let me see
    The ripe tall grass, and one that walked therein,
  Naked, with hair shed over to the knee.

  She walked between the blossom and the grass;
  I knew the beauty of her, what she was,
    The beauty of her body and her sin,
  And in my flesh the sin of hers, alas!

  Alas! for sorrow is all the end of this.
  O sad kissed mouth, how sorrowful it is!
    O breast whereat some suckling sorrow clings,
  Red with the bitter blossom of a kiss!

  Ah, with blind lips I felt for you, and found
  About my neck your hands and hair enwound,
    The hands that stifle and the hair that stings,
  I felt them fasten sharply without sound.

  Yea, for my sin I had great store of bliss:
  Rise up, make answer for me, let thy kiss
    Seal my lips hard from speaking of my sin,
  Lest one go mad to hear how sweet it is.

  Yet I waxed faint with fume of barren bowers,
  And murmuring of the heavy-headed hours;
    And let the dove's beak fret and peck within
  My lips in vain, and Love shed fruitless flowers.

  So that God looked upon me when your hands
  Were hot about me; yea, God brake my bands
    To save my soul alive, and I came forth
  Like a man blind and naked in strange lands

  That hears men laugh and weep, and knows not whence
  Nor wherefore, but is broken in his sense;
    Howbeit I met folk riding from the north
  Towards Rome, to purge them of their souls' offence,

  And rode with them, and spake to none; the day
  Stunned me like lights upon some wizard way,
    And ate like fire mine eyes and mine eyesight;
  So rode I, hearing all these chant and pray,

  And marvelled; till before us rose and fell
  White cursed hills, like outer skirts of hell
    Seen where men's eyes look through the day to night,
  Like a jagged shell's lips, harsh, untunable,

  Blown in between by devils' wrangling breath;
  Nathless we won well past that hell and death,
    Down to the sweet land where all airs are good,
  Even unto Rome where God's grace tarrieth.

  Then came each man and worshipped at his knees
  Who in the Lord God's likeness bears the keys
    To bind or loose, and called on Christ's shed blood,
  And so the sweet-souled father gave him ease.

  But when I came I fell down at his feet,
  Saying, "Father, though the Lord's blood be right sweet,
    The spot it takes not off the panther's skin,
  Nor shall an Ethiop's stain be bleached with it.

  "Lo, I have sinned and have spat out at God,
  Wherefore his hand is heavier and his rod
    More sharp because of mine exceeding sin,
  And all his raiment redder than bright blood

  "Before mine eyes; yea, for my sake I wot
  The heat of hell is waxen seven times hot
    Through my great sin." Then spake he some sweet word,
  Giving me cheer; which thing availed me not;

  Yea, scarce I wist if such indeed were said;
  For when I ceased--lo, as one newly dead
    Who hears a great cry out of hell, I heard
  The crying of his voice across my head.

  "Until this dry shred staff, that hath no whit
  Of leaf nor bark, bear blossom and smell sweet,
    Seek thou not any mercy in God's sight,
  For so long shalt thou be cast out from it."

  Yea, what if dried-up stems wax red and green,
  Shall that thing be which is not nor has been?
    Yea, what if sapless bark wax green and white,
  Shall any good fruit grow upon my sin?

  Nay, though sweet fruit were plucked of a dry tree,
  And though men drew sweet waters of the sea,
    There should not grow sweet leaves on this dead stem,
  This waste wan body and shaken soul of me.

  Yea, though God search it warily enough,
  There is not one sound thing in all thereof;
    Though he search all my veins through, searching them
  He shall find nothing whole therein but love.

  For I came home right heavy, with small cheer,
  And lo my love, mine own soul's heart, more dear
    Than mine own soul, more beautiful than God,
  Who hath my being between the hands of her--

  Fair still, but fair for no man saving me,
  As when she came out of the naked sea
    Making the foam as fire whereon she trod,
  And as the inner flower of fire was she.

  Yea, she laid hold upon me, and her mouth
  Clove unto mine as soul to body doth,
    And, laughing, made her lips luxurious;
  Her hair had smells of all the sunburnt south,

  Strange spice and flower, strange savour of crushed fruit,
  And perfume the swart kings tread underfoot
    For pleasure when their minds wax amorous,
  Charred frankincense and grated sandal-root.

  And I forgot fear and all weary things,
  All ended prayers and perished thanksgivings,
    Feeling her face with all her eager hair
  Cleave to me, clinging as a fire that clings

  To the body and to the raiment, burning them;
  As after death I know that such-like flame
    Shall cleave to me for ever; yea, what care,
  Albeit I burn then, having felt the same?

  Ah love, there is no better life than this;
  To have known love, how bitter a thing it is,
    And afterward be cast out of God's sight;
  Yea, these that know not, shall they have such bliss

  High up in barren heaven before his face
  As we twain in the heavy-hearted place,
    Remembering love and all the dead delight,
  And all that time was sweet with for a space?

  For till the thunder in the trumpet be,
  Soul may divide from body, but not we
    One from another; I hold thee with my hand,
  I let mine eyes have all their will of thee,

  I seal myself upon thee with my might,
  Abiding alway out of all men's sight
    Until God loosen over sea and land
  The thunder of the trumpets of the night.

                      EXPLICIT LAUS VENERIS.




PHÆDRA

HIPPOLYTUS; PHÆDRA; CHORUS OF TROEZENIAN WOMEN


  HIPPOLYTUS.

  Lay not thine hand upon me; let me go;
  Take off thine eyes that put the gods to shame;
  What, wilt thou turn my loathing to thy death?


  PHÆDRA.

  Nay, I will never loosen hold nor breathe
  Till thou have slain me; godlike for great brows
  Thou art, and thewed as gods are, with clear hair:
  Draw now thy sword and smite me as thou art god,
  For verily I am smitten of other gods,
  Why not of thee?


  CHORUS.

                    O queen, take heed of words;
  Why wilt thou eat the husk of evil speech?
  Wear wisdom for that veil about thy head
  And goodness for the binding of thy brows.


  PHÆDRA.

  Nay, but this god hath cause enow to smite;
  If he will slay me, baring breast and throat,
  I lean toward the stroke with silent mouth
  And a great heart. Come, take thy sword and slay;
  Let me not starve between desire and death,
  But send me on my way with glad wet lips;
  For in the vein-drawn ashen-coloured palm
  Death's hollow hand holds water of sweet draught
  To dip and slake dried mouths at, as a deer
  Specked red from thorns laps deep and loses pain.
  Yea, if mine own blood ran upon my mouth,
  I would drink that. Nay, but be swift with me;
  Set thy sword here between the girdle and breast,
  For I shall grow a poison if I live.
  Are not my cheeks as grass, my body pale,
  And my breath like a dying poisoned man's?
  O whatsoever of godlike names thou be,
  By thy chief name I charge thee, thou strong god,
  And bid thee slay me. Strike, up to the gold,
  Up to the hand-grip of the hilt; strike here;
  For I am Cretan of my birth; strike now;
  For I am Theseus' wife; stab up to the rims,
  I am born daughter to Pasiphae.
  See thou spare not for greatness of my blood,
  Nor for the shining letters of my name:
  Make thy sword sure inside thine hand and smite,
  For the bright writing of my name is black,
  And I am sick with hating the sweet sun.


  HIPPOLYTUS.

  Let not this woman wail and cleave to me,
  That am no part of the gods' wrath with her;
  Loose ye her hands from me lest she take hurt.


  CHORUS.

  Lady, this speech and majesty are twain;
  Pure shame is of one counsel with the gods.


  HIPPOLYTUS.

  Man is as beast when shame stands off from him.


  PHÆDRA.

  Man, what have I to do with shame or thee?
  I am not of one counsel with the gods.
  I am their kin, I have strange blood in me,
  I am not of their likeness nor of thine:
  My veins are mixed, and therefore am I mad,
  Yea therefore chafe and turn on mine own flesh,
  Half of a woman made with half a god.
  But thou wast hewn out of an iron womb
  And fed with molten mother-snow for milk.
  A sword was nurse of thine; Hippolyta,
  That had the spear to father, and the axe
  To bridesman, and wet blood of sword-slain men
  For wedding-water out of a noble well,
  Even she did bear thee, thinking of a sword,
  And thou wast made a man mistakingly.
  Nay, for I love thee, I will have thy hands,
  Nay, for I will not loose thee, thou art sweet,
  Thou art my son, I am thy father's wife,
  I ache toward thee with a bridal blood,
  The pulse is heavy in all my married veins,
  My whole face beats, I will feed full of thee,
  My body is empty of ease, I will be fed,
  I am burnt to the bone with love, thou shalt not go,
  I am heartsick, and mine eyelids prick mine eyes,
  Thou shalt not sleep nor eat nor say a word
  Till thou hast slain me. I am not good to live.


  CHORUS.

  This is an evil born with all its teeth,
  When love is cast out of the bound of love.


  HIPPOLYTUS.

  There is no hate that is so hateworthy.


  PHÆDRA.

  I pray thee turn that hate of thine my way,
  I hate not it nor anything of thine.
  Lo, maidens, how he burns about the brow,
  And draws the chafing sword-strap down his hand.
  What wilt thou do? wilt thou be worse than death?
  Be but as sweet as is the bitterest,
  The most dispiteous out of all the gods,
  I am well pleased. Lo, do I crave so much?
  I do but bid thee be unmerciful,
  Even the one thing thou art. Pity me not:
  Thou wert not quick to pity. Think of me
  As of a thing thy hounds are keen upon
  In the wet woods between the windy ways,
  And slay me for a spoil. This body of mine
  Is worth a wild beast's fell or hide of hair,
  And spotted deeper than a panther's grain.
  I were but dead if thou wert pure indeed;
  I pray thee by thy cold green holy crown
  And by the fillet-leaves of Artemis.
  Nay, but thou wilt not. Death is not like thee.
  Albeit men hold him worst of all the gods.
  For of all gods Death only loves not gifts,[1]
  Nor with burnt-offering nor blood-sacrifice
  Shalt thou do aught to get thee grace of him;
  He will have nought of altar and altar-song,
  And from him only of all the lords in heaven
  Persuasion turns a sweet averted mouth.
  But thou art worse: from thee with baffled breath
  Back on my lips my prayer falls like a blow,
  And beats upon them, dumb. What shall I say?
  There is no word I can compel thee with
  To do me good and slay me. But take heed;
  I say, be wary; look between thy feet,
  Lest a snare take them though the ground be good.


  HIPPOLYTUS.

  Shame may do most where fear is found most weak;
  That which for shame's sake yet I have not done,
  Shall it be done for fear's? Take thine own way;
  Better the foot slip than the whole soul swerve.


  PHÆDRA.

  The man is choice and exquisite of mouth;
  Yet in the end a curse shall curdle it.


  CHORUS.

  He goes with cloak upgathered to the lip,
  Holding his eye as with some ill in sight.


  PHÆDRA.

  A bitter ill he hath i' the way thereof,
  And it shall burn the sight out as with fire.


  CHORUS.

  Speak no such word whereto mischance is kin.


  PHÆDRA.

  Out of my heart and by fate's leave I speak.


  CHORUS.

  Set not thy heart to follow after fate.


  PHÆDRA.

  O women, O sweet people of this land,
  O goodly city and pleasant ways thereof,
  And woods with pasturing grass and great well-heads,
  And hills with light and night between your leaves,
  And winds with sound and silence in your lips,
  And earth and water and all immortal things,
  I take you to my witness what I am.
  There is a god about me like as fire,
  Sprung whence, who knoweth, or who hath heart to say?
  A god more strong than whom slain beasts can soothe,
  Or honey, or any spilth of blood-like wine,
  Nor shall one please him with a whitened brow
  Nor wheat nor wool nor aught of plaited leaf.
  For like my mother am I stung and slain,
  And round my cheeks have such red malady
  And on my lips such fire and foam as hers.
  This is that Ate out of Amathus
  That breeds up death and gives it one for love.
  She hath slain mercy, and for dead mercy's sake
  (Being frighted with this sister that was slain)
  Flees from before her fearful-footed shame,
  And will not bear the bending of her brows
  And long soft arrows flown from under them
  As from bows bent. Desire flows out of her
  As out of lips doth speech: and over her
  Shines fire, and round her and beneath her fire.
  She hath sown pain and plague in all our house,
  Love loathed of love, and mates unmatchable,
  Wild wedlock, and the lusts that bleat or low,
  And marriage-fodder snuffed about of kine.
  Lo how the heifer runs with leaping flank
  Sleek under shaggy and speckled lies of hair,
  And chews a horrible lip, and with harsh tongue
  Laps alien froth and licks a loathlier mouth.
  Alas, a foul first steam of trodden tares,
  And fouler of these late grapes underfoot.
  A bitter way of waves and clean-cut foam
  Over the sad road of sonorous sea
  The high gods gave king Theseus for no love,
  Nay, but for love, yet to no loving end.
  Alas the long thwarts and the fervent oars,
  And blown hard sails that straightened the scant rope!
  There were no strong pools in the hollow sea
  To drag at them and suck down side and beak,
  No wind to catch them in the teeth and hair,
  No shoal, no shallow among the roaring reefs,
  No gulf whereout the straining tides throw spars,
  No surf where white bones twist like whirled white fire.
  But like to death he came with death, and sought
  And slew and spoiled and gat him that he would.
  For death, for marriage, and for child-getting,
  I set my curse against him as a sword;
  Yea, and the severed half thereof I leave
  Pittheus, because he slew not (when that face
  Was tender, and the life still soft in it)
  The small swathed child, but bred him for my fate.
  I would I had been the first that took her death
  Out from between wet hoofs and reddened teeth,
  Splashed horns, fierce fetlocks of the brother bull?
  For now shall I take death a deadlier way,
  Gathering it up between the feet of love
  Or off the knees of murder reaching it.

    [1] Æsch. Fr. Niobe:--
          [Greek: monos theôn gar Thanatos ou dôrôn era, k.t.l.]




THE TRIUMPH OF TIME


  Before our lives divide for ever,
    While time is with us and hands are free,
  (Time, swift to fasten and swift to sever
    Hand from hand, as we stand by the sea)
  I will say no word that a man might say
  Whose whole life's love goes down in a day;
  For this could never have been; and never,
    Though the gods and the years relent, shall be.

  Is it worth a tear, is it worth an hour,
    To think of things that are well outworn?
  Of fruitless husk and fugitive flower,
    The dream foregone and the deed forborne?
  Though joy be done with and grief be vain,
  Time shall not sever us wholly in twain;
  Earth is not spoilt for a single shower;
    But the rain has ruined the ungrown corn.

  It will grow not again, this fruit of my heart,
    Smitten with sunbeams, ruined with rain.
  The singing seasons divide and depart,
    Winter and summer depart in twain.
  It will grow not again, it is ruined at root,
  The bloodlike blossom, the dull red fruit;
  Though the heart yet sickens, the lips yet smart,
    With sullen savour of poisonous pain.

  I have given no man of my fruit to eat;
    I trod the grapes, I have drunken the wine.
  Had you eaten and drunken and found it sweet,
    This wild new growth of the corn and vine,
  This wine and bread without lees or leaven,
  We had grown as gods, as the gods in heaven,
  Souls fair to look upon, goodly to greet,
    One splendid spirit, your soul and mine.

  In the change of years, in the coil of things,
    In the clamour and rumour of life to be,
  We, drinking love at the furthest springs,
    Covered with love as a covering tree,
  We had grown as gods, as the gods above,
  Filled from the heart to the lips with love,
  Held fast in his hands, clothed warm with his wings,
    O love, my love, had you loved but me!

  We had stood as the sure stars stand, and moved
    As the moon moves, loving the world; and seen
  Grief collapse as a thing disproved,
    Death consume as a thing unclean.
  Twain halves of a perfect heart, made fast
  Soul to soul while the years fell past;
  Had you loved me once, as you have not loved;
    Had the chance been with us that has not been.

  I have put my days and dreams out of mind,
    Days that are over, dreams that are done.
  Though we seek life through, we shall surely find
    There is none of them clear to us now, not one.
  But clear are these things; the grass and the sand,
  Where, sure as the eyes reach, ever at hand,
  With lips wide open and face burnt blind,
    The strong sea-daisies feast on the sun.

  The low downs lean to the sea; the stream,
    One loose thin pulseless tremulous vein,
  Rapid and vivid and dumb as a dream,
    Works downward, sick of the sun and the rain;
  No wind is rough with the rank rare flowers;
  The sweet sea, mother of loves and hours,
  Shudders and shines as the grey winds gleam,
    Turning her smile to a fugitive pain.

  Mother of loves that are swift to fade,
    Mother of mutable winds and hours.
  A barren mother, a mother-maid,
    Cold and clean as her faint salt flowers.
  I would we twain were even as she,
  Lost in the night and the light of the sea,
  Where faint sounds falter and wan beams wade,
    Break, and are broken, and shed into showers.

  The loves and hours of the life of a man,
    They are swift and sad, being born of the sea.
  Hours that rejoice and regret for a span,
    Born with a man's breath, mortal as he;
  Loves that are lost ere they come to birth,
  Weeds of the wave, without fruit upon earth.
  I lose what I long for, save what I can,
    My love, my love, and no love for me!

  It is not much that a man can save
    On the sands of life, in the straits of time,
  Who swims in sight of the great third wave
    That never a swimmer shall cross or climb.
  Some waif washed up with the strays and spars
  That ebb-tide shows to the shore and the stars;
  Weed from the water, grass from a grave,
    A broken blossom, a ruined rhyme.

  There will no man do for your sake, I think,
    What I would have done for the least word said.
  I had wrung life dry for your lips to drink,
    Broken it up for your daily bread:
  Body for body and blood for blood,
  As the flow of the full sea risen to flood
  That yearns and trembles before it sink,
    I had given, and lain down for you, glad and dead.

  Yea, hope at highest and all her fruit,
    And time at fullest and all his dower,
  I had given you surely, and life to boot,
    Were we once made one for a single hour.
  But now, you are twain, you are cloven apart,
  Flesh of his flesh, but heart of my heart;
  And deep in one is the bitter root,
    And sweet for one is the lifelong flower.

  To have died if you cared I should die for you, clung
    To my life if you bade me, played my part
  As it pleased you--these were the thoughts that stung,
    The dreams that smote with a keener dart
  Than shafts of love or arrows of death;
  These were but as fire is, dust, or breath,
  Or poisonous foam on the tender tongue
    Of the little snakes that eat my heart.

  I wish we were dead together to-day,
    Lost sight of, hidden away out of sight,
  Clasped and clothed in the cloven clay,
    Out of the world's way, out of the light,
  Out of the ages of worldly weather,
  Forgotten of all men altogether,
  As the world's first dead, taken wholly away,
    Made one with death, filled full of the night.

  How we should slumber, how we should sleep,
    Far in the dark with the dreams and the dews!
  And dreaming, grow to each other, and weep,
    Laugh low, live softly, murmur and muse;
  Yea, and it may be, struck through by the dream,
  Feel the dust quicken and quiver, and seem
  Alive as of old to the lips, and leap
    Spirit to spirit as lovers use.

  Sick dreams and sad of a dull delight;
    For what shall it profit when men are dead
  To have dreamed, to have loved with the whole soul's might,
    To have looked for day when the day was fled?
  Let come what will, there is one thing worth,
  To have had fair love in the life upon earth:
  To have held love safe till the day grew night,
    While skies had colour and lips were red.

  Would I lose you now? would I take you then,
    If I lose you now that my heart has need?
  And come what may after death to men,
    What thing worth this will the dead years breed?
  Lose life, lose all; but at least I know,
  O sweet life's love, having loved you so,
  Had I reached you on earth, I should lose not again,
    In death nor life, nor in dream or deed.

  Yea, I know this well: were you once sealed mine,
    Mine in the blood's beat, mine in the breath,
  Mixed into me as honey in wine,
    Not time, that sayeth and gainsayeth,
  Nor all strong things had severed us then;
  Not wrath of gods, nor wisdom of men,
  Nor all things earthly, nor all divine,
    Nor joy nor sorrow, nor life nor death.

  I had grown pure as the dawn and the dew,
    You had grown strong as the sun or the sea.
  But none shall triumph a whole life through:
    For death is one, and the fates are three.
  At the door of life, by the gate of breath,
  There are worse things waiting for men than death;
  Death could not sever my soul and you,
    As these have severed your soul from me.

  You have chosen and clung to the chance they sent you,
    Life sweet as perfume and pure as prayer.
  But will it not one day in heaven repent you?
    Will they solace you wholly, the days that were?
  Will you lift up your eyes between sadness and bliss,
  Meet mine, and see where the great love is,
  And tremble and turn and be changed? Content you;
    The gate is strait; I shall not be there.

  But you, had you chosen, had you stretched hand,
    Had you seen good such a thing were done,
  I too might have stood with the souls that stand
    In the sun's sight, clothed with the light of the sun;
  But who now on earth need care how I live?
  Have the high gods anything left to give,
  Save dust and laurels and gold and sand?
    Which gifts are goodly; but I will none.

  O all fair lovers about the world,
    There is none of you, none, that shall comfort me.
  My thoughts are as dead things, wrecked and whirled
    Round and round in a gulf of the sea;
  And still, through the sound and the straining stream,
  Through the coil and chafe, they gleam in a dream,
  The bright fine lips so cruelly curled,
    And strange swift eyes where the soul sits free.

  Free, without pity, withheld from woe,
    Ignorant; fair as the eyes are fair.
  Would I have you change now, change at a blow,
    Startled and stricken, awake and aware?
  Yea, if I could, would I have you see
  My very love of you filling me,
  And know my soul to the quick, as I know
    The likeness and look of your throat and hair?

  I shall not change you. Nay, though I might,
    Would I change my sweet one love with a word?
  I had rather your hair should change in a night,
    Clear now as the plume of a black bright bird;
  Your face fail suddenly, cease, turn grey,
  Die as a leaf that dies in a day.
  I will keep my soul in a place out of sight,
    Far off, where the pulse of it is not heard.

  Far off it walks, in a bleak blown space,
    Full of the sound of the sorrow of years.
  I have woven a veil for the weeping face,
    Whose lips have drunken the wine of tears;
  I have found a way for the failing feet,
  A place for slumber and sorrow to meet;
  There is no rumour about the place,
    Nor light, nor any that sees or hears.

  I have hidden my soul out of sight, and said
    "Let none take pity upon thee, none
  Comfort thy crying: for lo, thou art dead,
    Lie still now, safe out of sight of the sun.
  Have I not built thee a grave, and wrought
  Thy grave-clothes on thee of grievous thought,
  With soft spun verses and tears unshed,
    And sweet light visions of things undone?

  "I have given thee garments and balm and myrrh,
    And gold, and beautiful burial things.
  But thou, be at peace now, make no stir;
    Is not thy grave as a royal king's?
  Fret not thyself though the end were sore;
  Sleep, be patient, vex me no more.
  Sleep; what hast thou to do with her?
    The eyes that weep, with the mouth that sings?"

  Where the dead red leaves of the years lie rotten,
    The cold old crimes and the deeds thrown by,
  The misconceived and the misbegotten,
    I would find a sin to do ere I die,
  Sure to dissolve and destroy me all through,
  That would set you higher in heaven, serve you
  And leave you happy, when clean forgotten,
    As a dead man out of mind, am I.

  Your lithe hands draw me, your face burns through me,
    I am swift to follow you, keen to see;
  But love lacks might to redeem or undo me;
    As I have been, I know I shall surely be;
  "What should such fellows as I do?" Nay,
  My part were worse if I chose to play;
  For the worst is this after all; if they knew me,
    Not a soul upon earth would pity me.

  And I play not for pity of these; but you,
    If you saw with your soul what man am I,
  You would praise me at least that my soul all through
    Clove to you, loathing the lives that lie;
  The souls and lips that are bought and sold,
  The smiles of silver and kisses of gold,
  The lapdog loves that whine as they chew,
    The little lovers that curse and cry.

  There are fairer women, I hear; that may be;
    But I, that I love you and find you fair,
  Who are more than fair in my eyes if they be,
    Do the high gods know or the great gods care?
  Though the swords in my heart for one were seven,
  Would the iron hollow of doubtful heaven,
  That knows not itself whether night-time or day be,
    Reverberate words and a foolish prayer?

  I will go back to the great sweet mother,
    Mother and lover of men, the sea.
  I will go down to her, I and none other,
    Close with her, kiss her and mix her with me;
  Cling to her, strive with her, hold her fast:
  O fair white mother, in days long past
  Born without sister, born without brother,
    Set free my soul as thy soul is free.

  O fair green-girdled mother of mine,
    Sea, that art clothed with the sun and the rain,
  Thy sweet hard kisses are strong like wine,
    Thy large embraces are keen like pain.
  Save me and hide me with all thy waves,
  Find me one grave of thy thousand graves,
  Those pure cold populous graves of thine
    Wrought without hand in a world without stain.

  I shall sleep, and move with the moving ships,
    Change as the winds change, veer in the tide;
  My lips will feast on the foam of thy lips,
    I shall rise with thy rising, with thee subside;
  Sleep, and not know if she be, if she were,
  Filled full with life to the eyes and hair,
  As a rose is fulfilled to the roseleaf tips
    With splendid summer and perfume and pride.

  This woven raiment of nights and days,
    Were it once cast off and unwound from me,
  Naked and glad would I walk in thy ways,
    Alive and aware of thy ways and thee;
  Clear of the whole world, hidden at home,
  Clothed with the green and crowned with the foam,
  A pulse of the life of thy straits and bays,
    A vein in the heart of the streams of the sea.

  Fair mother, fed with the lives of men,
    Thou art subtle and cruel of heart, men say.
  Thou hast taken, and shalt not render again;
    Thou art full of thy dead, and cold as they.
  But death is the worst that comes of thee;
  Thou art fed with our dead, O mother, O sea,
  But when hast thou fed on our hearts? or when,
    Having given us love, hast thou taken away?

  O tender-hearted, O perfect lover,
    Thy lips are bitter, and sweet thine heart.
  The hopes that hurt and the dreams that hover,
    Shall they not vanish away and apart?
  But thou, thou art sure, thou art older than earth;
  Thou art strong for death and fruitful of birth;
  Thy depths conceal and thy gulfs discover;
    From the first thou wert; in the end thou art.

  And grief shall endure not for ever, I know.
    As things that are not shall these things be;
  We shall live through seasons of sun and of snow,
    And none be grievous as this to me.
  We shall hear, as one in a trance that hears,
  The sound of time, the rhyme of the years;
  Wrecked hope and passionate pain will grow
    As tender things of a spring-tide sea.

  Sea-fruit that swings in the waves that hiss,
    Drowned gold and purple and royal rings.
  And all time past, was it all for this?
    Times unforgotten, and treasures of things?
  Swift years of liking and sweet long laughter,
  That wist not well of the years thereafter
  Till love woke, smitten at heart by a kiss,
    With lips that trembled and trailing wings?

  There lived a singer in France of old
    By the tideless dolorous midland sea.
  In a land of sand and ruin and gold
    There shone one woman, and none but she.
  And finding life for her love's sake fail,
  Being fain to see her, he bade set sail,
  Touched land, and saw her as life grew cold,
    And praised God, seeing; and so died he.

  Died, praising God for his gift and grace:
    For she bowed down to him weeping, and said
  "Live;" and her tears were shed on his face
    Or ever the life in his face was shed.
  The sharp tears fell through her hair, and stung
  Once, and her close lips touched him and clung
  Once, and grew one with his lips for a space;
    And so drew back, and the man was dead.

  O brother, the gods were good to you.
    Sleep, and be glad while the world endures.
  Be well content as the years wear through;
    Give thanks for life, and the loves and lures;
  Give thanks for life, O brother, and death,
  For the sweet last sound of her feet, her breath,
  For gifts she gave you, gracious and few,
    Tears and kisses, that lady of yours.

  Rest, and be glad of the gods; but I,
    How shall I praise them, or how take rest?
  There is not room under all the sky
    For me that know not of worst or best,
  Dream or desire of the days before,
  Sweet things or bitterness, any more.
  Love will not come to me now though I die,
    As love came close to you, breast to breast.

  I shall never be friends again with roses;
    I shall loathe sweet tunes, where a note grown strong
  Relents and recoils, and climbs and closes,
    As a wave of the sea turned back by song.
  There are sounds where the soul's delight takes fire,
  Face to face with its own desire;
  A delight that rebels, a desire that reposes;
   I shall hate sweet music my whole life long.

  The pulse of war and passion of wonder,
   The heavens that murmur, the sounds that shine,
  The stars that sing and the loves that thunder,
   The music burning at heart like wine,
  An armed archangel whose hands raise up
  All senses mixed in the spirit's cup
  Till flesh and spirit are molten in sunder--
    These things are over, and no more mine.

  These were a part of the playing I heard
    Once, ere my love and my heart were at strife;
  Love that sings and hath wings as a bird,
    Balm of the wound and heft of the knife.
  Fairer than earth is the sea, and sleep
  Than overwatching of eyes that weep,
  Now time has done with his one sweet word,
    The wine and leaven of lovely life.

  I shall go my ways, tread out my measure,
    Fill the days of my daily breath
  With fugitive things not good to treasure,
    Do as the world doth, say as it saith;
  But if we had loved each other--O sweet,
  Had you felt, lying under the palms of your feet,
  The heart of my heart, beating harder with pleasure
    To feel you tread it to dust and death--

  Ah, had I not taken my life up and given
    All that life gives and the years let go,
  The wine and honey, the balm and leaven,
    The dreams reared high and the hopes brought low?
  Come life, come death, not a word be said;
  Should I lose you living, and vex you dead?
  I never shall tell you on earth; and in heaven,
    If I cry to you then, will you hear or know?




LES NOYADES


  Whatever a man of the sons of men
    Shall say to his heart of the lords above,
  They have shown man verily, once and again,
    Marvellous mercies and infinite love.

  In the wild fifth year of the change of things,
    When France was glorious and blood-red, fair
  With dust of battle and deaths of kings,
    A queen of men, with helmeted hair,

  Carrier came down to the Loire and slew,
    Till all the ways and the waves waxed red:
  Bound and drowned, slaying two by two,
    Maidens and young men, naked and wed.

  They brought on a day to his judgment-place
    One rough with labour and red with fight,
  And a lady noble by name and face,
    Faultless, a maiden, wonderful, white.

  She knew not, being for shame's sake blind,
    If his eyes were hot on her face hard by.
  And the judge bade strip and ship them, and bind
    Bosom to bosom, to drown and die.

  The white girl winced and whitened; but he
    Caught fire, waxed bright as a great bright flame
  Seen with thunder far out on the sea,
    Laughed hard as the glad blood went and came.

  Twice his lips quailed with delight, then said,
    "I have but a word to you all, one word;
  Bear with me; surely I am but dead;"
    And all they laughed and mocked him and heard.

  "Judge, when they open the judgment-roll,
    I will stand upright before God and pray:
  'Lord God, have mercy on one man's soul,
    For his mercy was great upon earth, I say.

  "'Lord, if I loved thee--Lord, if I served--
    If these who darkened thy fair Son's face
  I fought with, sparing not one, nor swerved
    A hand's-breadth, Lord, in the perilous place--

  "'I pray thee say to this man, O Lord,
    _Sit thou for him at my feet on a throne_.
  I will face thy wrath, though it bite as a sword,
    And my soul shall burn for his soul, and atone.

  "'For, Lord, thou knowest, O God most wise,
    How gracious on earth were his deeds towards me.
  Shall this be a small thing in thine eyes,
    That is greater in mine than the whole great sea?'

  "I have loved this woman my whole life long,
    And even for love's sake when have I said
  'I love you'? when have I done you wrong,
    Living? but now I shall have you dead.

  "Yea, now, do I bid you love me, love?
    Love me or loathe, we are one not twain.
  But God be praised in his heaven above
    For this my pleasure and that my pain!

  "For never a man, being mean like me,
    Shall die like me till the whole world dies.
  I shall drown with her, laughing for love; and she
    Mix with me, touching me, lips and eyes.

  "Shall she not know me and see me all through,
    Me, on whose heart as a worm she trod?
  You have given me, God requite it you,
    What man yet never was given of God."

  O sweet one love, O my life's delight,
    Dear, though the days have divided us,
  Lost beyond hope, taken far out of sight,
    Not twice in the world shall the gods do thus.

  Had it been so hard for my love? but I,
    Though the gods gave all that a god can give,
  I had chosen rather the gift to die,
    Cease, and be glad above all that live.

  For the Loire would have driven us down to the sea,
    And the sea would have pitched us from shoal to shoal;
  And I should have held you, and you held me,
    As flesh holds flesh, and the soul the soul.

  Could I change you, help you to love me, sweet,
    Could I give you the love that would sweeten death,
  We should yield, go down, locked hands and feet,
    Die, drown together, and breath catch breath;

  But you would have felt my soul in a kiss,
    And known that once if I loved you well;
  And I would have given my soul for this
    To burn for ever in burning hell.




A LEAVE-TAKING


  Let us go hence, my songs; she will not hear.
  Let us go hence together without fear;
  Keep silence now, for singing-time is over,
  And over all old things and all things dear.
  She loves not you nor me as all we love her.
  Yea, though we sang as angels in her ear,
        She would not hear.

  Let us rise up and part; she will not know.
  Let us go seaward as the great winds go,
  Full of blown sand and foam; what help is here?
  There is no help, for all these things are so,
  And all the world is bitter as a tear.
  And how these things are, though ye strove to show,
        She would not know.

  Let us go home and hence; she will not weep.
  We gave love many dreams and days to keep,
  Flowers without scent, and fruits that would not grow,
  Saying 'If thou wilt, thrust in thy sickle and reap.'
  All is reaped now; no grass is left to mow;
  And we that sowed, though all we fell on sleep,
        She would not weep.

  Let us go hence and rest; she will not love.
  She shall not hear us if we sing hereof,
  Nor see love's ways, how sore they are and steep.
  Come hence, let be, lie still; it is enough.
  Love is a barren sea, bitter and deep;
  And though she saw all heaven in flower above,
        She would not love.

  Let us give up, go down; she will not care.
  Though all the stars made gold of all the air,
  And the sea moving saw before it move
  One moon-flower making all the foam-flowers fair;
  Though all those waves went over us, and drove
  Deep down the stifling lips and drowning hair,
        She would not care.

  Let us go hence, go hence; she will not see.
  Sing all once more together; surely she,
  She too, remembering days and words that were,
  Will turn a little toward us, sighing; but we,
  We are hence, we are gone, as though we had not been there.
  Nay, and though all men seeing had pity on me,
        She would not see.




ITYLUS


  Swallow, my sister, O sister swallow,
    How can thine heart be full of the spring?
      A thousand summers are over and dead.
  What hast thou found in the spring to follow?
    What hast thou found in thine heart to sing?
      What wilt thou do when the summer is shed?

  O swallow, sister, O fair swift swallow,
    Why wilt thou fly after spring to the south,
      The soft south whither thine heart is set?
  Shall not the grief of the old time follow?
    Shall not the song thereof cleave to thy mouth?
      Hast thou forgotten ere I forget?

  Sister, my sister, O fleet sweet swallow,
    Thy way is long to the sun and the south;
      But I, fulfilled of my heart's desire,
  Shedding my song upon height, upon hollow,
    From tawny body and sweet small mouth
      Feed the heart of the night with fire.

  I the nightingale all spring through,
    O swallow, sister, O changing swallow,
      All spring through till the spring be done,
  Clothed with the light of the night on the dew,
    Sing, while the hours and the wild birds follow,
      Take flight and follow and find the sun.

  Sister, my sister, O soft light swallow,
    Though all things feast in the spring's guest-chamber,
      How hast thou heart to be glad thereof yet?
  For where thou fliest I shall not follow,
    Till life forget and death remember,
      Till thou remember and I forget.

  Swallow, my sister, O singing swallow,
    I know not how thou hast heart to sing.
      Hast thou the heart? is it all past over?
  Thy lord the summer is good to follow,
    And fair the feet of thy lover the spring:
      But what wilt thou say to the spring thy lover?

  O swallow, sister, O fleeting swallow,
    My heart in me is a molten ember
      And over my head the waves have met.
  But thou wouldst tarry or I would follow,
    Could I forget or thou remember,
      Couldst thou remember and I forget.

  O sweet stray sister, O shifting swallow,
    The heart's division divideth us.
      Thy heart is light as a leaf of a tree;
  But mine goes forth among sea-gulfs hollow
    To the place of the slaying of Itylus,
      The feast of Daulis, the Thracian sea.

  O swallow, sister, O rapid swallow,
    I pray thee sing not a little space.
      Are not the roofs and the lintels wet?
  The woven web that was plain to follow,
    The small slain body, the flowerlike face,
      Can I remember if thou forget?

  O sister, sister, thy first-begotten!
    The hands that cling and the feet that follow,
      The voice of the child's blood crying yet
  _Who hath remembered me? who hath forgotten?_
    Thou hast forgotten, O summer swallow,
      But the world shall end when I forget.




ANACTORIA

            [Greek: tinos au ty peithoi
            maps sagêneusas philotata?]
                                    SAPPHO.


  My life is bitter with thy love; thine eyes
  Blind me, thy tresses burn me, thy sharp sighs
  Divide my flesh and spirit with soft sound,
  And my blood strengthens, and my veins abound.
  I pray thee sigh not, speak not, draw not breath;
  Let life burn down, and dream it is not death.
  I would the sea had hidden us, the fire
  (Wilt thou fear that, and fear not my desire?)
  Severed the bones that bleach, the flesh that cleaves,
  And let our sifted ashes drop like leaves.
  I feel thy blood against my blood: my pain
  Pains thee, and lips bruise lips, and vein stings vein.
  Let fruit be crushed on fruit, let flower on flower,
  Breast kindle breast, and either burn one hour.
  Why wilt thou follow lesser loves? are thine
  Too weak to bear these hands and lips of mine?
  I charge thee for my life's sake, O too sweet
  To crush love with thy cruel faultless feet,
  I charge thee keep thy lips from hers or his,
  Sweetest, till theirs be sweeter than my kiss.
  Lest I too lure, a swallow for a dove,
  Erotion or Erinna to my love.
  I would my love could kill thee; I am satiated
  With seeing thee live, and fain would have thee dead.
  I would earth had thy body as fruit to eat,
  And no mouth but some serpent's found thee sweet.
  I would find grievous ways to have thee slain,
  Intense device, and superflux of pain;
  Vex thee with amorous agonies, and shake
  Life at thy lips, and leave it there to ache;
  Strain out thy soul with pangs too soft to kill,
  Intolerable interludes, and infinite ill;
  Relapse and reluctation of the breath,
  Dumb tunes and shuddering semitones of death.
  I am weary of all thy words and soft strange ways,
  Of all love's fiery nights and all his days,
  And all the broken kisses salt as brine
  That shuddering lips make moist with waterish wine,
  And eyes the bluer for all those hidden hours
  That pleasure fills with tears and feeds from flowers,
  Fierce at the heart with fire that half comes through,
  But all the flowerlike white stained round with blue;
  The fervent underlid, and that above
  Lifted with laughter or abashed with love;
  Thine amorous girdle, full of thee and fair,
  And leavings of the lilies in thine hair.
  Yea, all sweet words of thine and all thy ways,
  And all the fruit of nights and flower of days,
  And stinging lips wherein the hot sweet brine
  That Love was born of burns and foams like wine,
  And eyes insatiable of amorous hours,
  Fervent as fire and delicate as flowers,
  Coloured like night at heart, but cloven through
  Like night with flame, dyed round like night with blue,
  Clothed with deep eyelids under and above--
  Yea, all thy beauty sickens me with love;
  Thy girdle empty of thee and now not fair,
  And ruinous lilies in thy languid hair.
  Ah, take no thought for Love's sake; shall this be,
  And she who loves thy lover not love thee?
  Sweet soul, sweet mouth of all that laughs and lives,
  Mine is she, very mine; and she forgives.
  For I beheld in sleep the light that is
  In her high place in Paphos, heard the kiss
  Of body and soul that mix with eager tears
  And laughter stinging through the eyes and ears;
  Saw Love, as burning flame from crown to feet,
  Imperishable, upon her storied seat;
  Clear eyelids lifted toward the north and south,
  A mind of many colours, and a mouth
  Of many tunes and kisses; and she bowed,
  With all her subtle face laughing aloud,
  Bowed down upon me, saying, "Who doth thee wrong,
  Sappho?" but thou--thy body is the song,
  Thy mouth the music; thou art more than I,
  Though my voice die not till the whole world die;
  Though men that hear it madden; though love weep,
  Though nature change, though shame be charmed to sleep.
  Ah, wilt thou slay me lest I kiss thee dead?
  Yet the queen laughed from her sweet heart and said:
  "Even she that flies shall follow for thy sake,
  And she shall give thee gifts that would not take,
  Shall kiss that would not kiss thee" (yea, kiss me)
  "When thou wouldst not"--when I would not kiss thee!
  Ah, more to me than all men as thou art,
  Shall not my songs assuage her at the heart?
  Ah, sweet to me as life seems sweet to death,
  Why should her wrath fill thee with fearful breath?
  Nay, sweet, for is she God alone? hath she
  Made earth and all the centuries of the sea,
  Taught the sun ways to travel, woven most fine
  The moonbeams, shed the starbeams forth as wine,
  Bound with her myrtles, beaten with her rods,
  The young men and the maidens and the gods?
  Have we not lips to love with, eyes for tears,
  And summer and flower of women and of years?
  Stars for the foot of morning, and for noon
  Sunlight, and exaltation of the moon;
  Waters that answer waters, fields that wear
  Lilies, and languor of the Lesbian air?
  Beyond those flying feet of fluttered doves,
  Are there not other gods for other loves?
  Yea, though she scourge thee, sweetest, for my sake,
  Blossom not thorns and flowers not blood should break.
  Ah that my lips were tuneless lips, but pressed
  To the bruised blossom of thy scourged white breast!
  Ah that my mouth for Muses' milk were fed
  On the sweet blood thy sweet small wounds had bled!
  That with my tongue I felt them, and could taste
  The faint flakes from thy bosom to the waist!
  That I could drink thy veins as wine, and eat
  Thy breasts like honey! that from face to feet
  Thy body were abolished and consumed,
  And in my flesh thy very flesh entombed!
  Ah, ah, thy beauty! like a beast it bites,
  Stings like an adder, like an arrow smites.
  Ah sweet, and sweet again, and seven times sweet,
  The paces and the pauses of thy feet!
  Ah sweeter than all sleep or summer air
  The fallen fillets fragrant from thine hair!
  Yea, though their alien kisses do me wrong,
  Sweeter thy lips than mine with all their song;
  Thy shoulders whiter than a fleece of white,
  And flower-sweet fingers, good to bruise or bite
  As honeycomb of the inmost honey-cells,
  With almond-shaped and roseleaf-coloured shells
  And blood like purple blossom at the tips
  Quivering; and pain made perfect in thy lips
  For my sake when I hurt thee; O that I
  Durst crush thee out of life with love, and die,
  Die of thy pain and my delight, and be
  Mixed with thy blood and molten into thee!
  Would I not plague thee dying overmuch?
  Would I not hurt thee perfectly? not touch
  Thy pores of sense with torture, and make bright
  Thine eyes with bloodlike tears and grievous light?
  Strike pang from pang as note is struck from note,
  Catch the sob's middle music in thy throat,
  Take thy limbs living, and new-mould with these
  A lyre of many faultless agonies?
  Feed thee with fever and famine and fine drouth,
  With perfect pangs convulse thy perfect mouth,
  Make thy life shudder in thee and burn afresh,
  And wring thy very spirit through the flesh?
  Cruel? but love makes all that love him well
  As wise as heaven and crueller than hell.
  Me hath love made more bitter toward thee
  Than death toward man; but were I made as he
  Who hath made all things to break them one by one,
  If my feet trod upon the stars and sun
  And souls of men as his have alway trod,
  God knows I might be crueller than God.
  For who shall change with prayers or thanksgivings
  The mystery of the cruelty of things?
  Or say what God above all gods and years
  With offering and blood-sacrifice of tears,
  With lamentation from strange lands, from graves
  Where the snake pastures, from scarred mouths of slaves,
  From prison, and from plunging prows of ships
  Through flamelike foam of the sea's closing lips--
  With thwartings of strange signs, and wind-blown hair
  Of comets, desolating the dim air,
  When darkness is made fast with seals and bars,
  And fierce reluctance of disastrous stars,
  Eclipse, and sound of shaken hills, and wings
  Darkening, and blind inexpiable things--
  With sorrow of labouring moons, and altering light
  And travail of the planets of the night,
  And weeping of the weary Pleiads seven,
  Feeds the mute melancholy lust of heaven?
  Is not his incense bitterness, his meat
  Murder? his hidden face and iron feet
  Hath not man known, and felt them on their way
  Threaten and trample all things and every day?
  Hath he not sent us hunger? who hath cursed
  Spirit and flesh with longing? filled with thirst
  Their lips who cried unto him? who bade exceed
  The fervid will, fall short the feeble deed,
  Bade sink the spirit and the flesh aspire,
  Pain animate the dust of dead desire,
  And life yield up her flower to violent fate?
  Him would I reach, him smite, him desecrate,
  Pierce the cold lips of God with human breath,
  And mix his immortality with death.
  Why hath he made us? what had all we done
  That we should live and loathe the sterile sun,
  And with the moon wax paler as she wanes,
  And pulse by pulse feel time grow through our veins?
  Thee too the years shall cover; thou shalt be
  As the rose born of one same blood with thee,
  As a song sung, as a word said, and fall
  Flower-wise, and be not any more at all,
  Nor any memory of thee anywhere;
  For never Muse has bound above thine hair
  The high Pierian flower whose graft outgrows
  All summer kinship of the mortal rose
  And colour of deciduous days, nor shed
  Reflex and flush of heaven about thine head,
  Nor reddened brows made pale by floral grief
  With splendid shadow from that lordlier leaf.
  Yea, thou shalt be forgotten like spilt wine,
  Except these kisses of my lips on thine
  Brand them with immortality; but me--
  Men shall not see bright fire nor hear the sea,
  Nor mix their hearts with music, nor behold
  Cast forth of heaven, with feet of awful gold
  And plumeless wings that make the bright air blind,
  Lightning, with thunder for a hound behind
  Hunting through fields unfurrowed and unsown,
  But in the light and laughter, in the moan
  And music, and in grasp of lip and hand
  And shudder of water that makes felt on land
  The immeasurable tremor of all the sea,
  Memories shall mix and metaphors of me.
  Like me shall be the shuddering calm of night,
  When all the winds of the world for pure delight
  Close lips that quiver and fold up wings that ache;
  When nightingales are louder for love's sake,
  And leaves tremble like lute-strings or like fire;
  Like me the one star swooning with desire
  Even at the cold lips of the sleepless moon,
  As I at thine; like me the waste white noon,
  Burnt through with barren sunlight; and like me
  The land-stream and the tide-stream in the sea.
  I am sick with time as these with ebb and flow,
  And by the yearning in my veins I know
  The yearning sound of waters; and mine eyes
  Burn as that beamless fire which fills the skies
  With troubled stars and travailing things of flame;
  And in my heart the grief consuming them
  Labours, and in my veins the thirst of these,
  And all the summer travail of the trees
  And all the winter sickness; and the earth,
  Filled full with deadly works of death and birth,
  Sore spent with hungry lusts of birth and death,
  Has pain like mine in her divided breath;
  Her spring of leaves is barren, and her fruit
  Ashes; her boughs are burdened, and her root
  Fibrous and gnarled with poison; underneath
  Serpents have gnawn it through with tortuous teeth
  Made sharp upon the bones of all the dead,
  And wild birds rend her branches overhead.
  These, woven as raiment for his word and thought,
  These hath God made, and me as these, and wrought
  Song, and hath lit it at my lips; and me
  Earth shall not gather though she feed on thee.
  As a shed tear shalt thou be shed; but I--
  Lo, earth may labour, men live long and die,
  Years change and stars, and the high God devise
  New things, and old things wane before his eyes
  Who wields and wrecks them, being more strong than they--
  But, having made me, me he shall not slay.
  Nor slay nor satiate, like those herds of his
  Who laugh and live a little, and their kiss
  Contents them, and their loves are swift and sweet,
  And sure death grasps and gains them with slow feet,
  Love they or hate they, strive or bow their knees--
  And all these end; he hath his will of these.
  Yea, but albeit he slay me, hating me--
  Albeit he hide me in the deep dear sea
  And cover me with cool wan foam, and ease
  This soul of mine as any soul of these,
  And give me water and great sweet waves, and make
  The very sea's name lordlier for my sake,
  The whole sea sweeter--albeit I die indeed
  And hide myself and sleep and no man heed,
  Of me the high God hath not all his will.
  Blossom of branches, and on each high hill
  Clear air and wind, and under in clamorous vales
  Fierce noises of the fiery nightingales,
  Buds burning in the sudden spring like fire,
  The wan washed sand and the waves' vain desire,
  Sails seen like blown white flowers at sea, and words
  That bring tears swiftest, and long notes of birds
  Violently singing till the whole world sings--
  I Sappho shall be one with all these things,
  With all high things for ever; and my face
  Seen once, my songs once heard in a strange place,
  Cleave to men's lives, and waste the days thereof
  With gladness and much sadness and long love.
  Yea, they shall say, earth's womb has borne in vain
  New things, and never this best thing again;
  Borne days and men, borne fruits and wars and wine,
  Seasons and songs, but no song more like mine.
  And they shall know me as ye who have known me here,
  Last year when I loved Atthis, and this year
  When I love thee; and they shall praise me, and say
  "She hath all time as all we have our day,
  Shall she not live and have her will"--even I?
  Yea, though thou diest, I say I shall not die.
  For these shall give me of their souls, shall give
  Life, and the days and loves wherewith I live,
  Shall quicken me with loving, fill with breath,
  Save me and serve me, strive for me with death.
  Alas, that neither moon nor snow nor dew
  Nor all cold things can purge me wholly through,
  Assuage me nor allay me nor appease,
  Till supreme sleep shall bring me bloodless ease;
  Till time wax faint in all his periods;
  Till fate undo the bondage of the gods,
  And lay, to slake and satiate me all through,
  Lotus and Lethe on my lips like dew,
  And shed around and over and under me
  Thick darkness and the insuperable sea.




HYMN TO PROSERPINE

(AFTER THE PROCLAMATION IN ROME OF THE CHRISTIAN FAITH)

_Vicisti, Galilæe._


  I have lived long enough, having seen one thing, that love hath an
      end;
  Goddess and maiden and queen, be near me now and befriend.
  Thou art more than the day or the morrow, the seasons that laugh or
      that weep;
  For these give joy and sorrow; but thou, Proserpina, sleep.
  Sweet is the treading of wine, and sweet the feet of the dove;
  But a goodlier gift is thine than foam of the grapes or love.
  Yea, is not even Apollo, with hair and harpstring of gold,
  A bitter God to follow, a beautiful God to behold?
  I am sick of singing: the bays burn deep and chafe: I am fain
  To rest a little from praise and grievous pleasure and pain.
  For the Gods we know not of, who give us our daily breath,
  We know they are cruel as love or life, and lovely as death.
  O Gods dethroned and deceased, cast forth, wiped out in a day!
  From your wrath is the world released, redeemed from your chains, men
      say.
  New Gods are crowned in the city; their flowers have broken your rods;
  They are merciful, clothed with pity, the young compassionate Gods.
  But for me their new device is barren, the days are bare;
  Things long past over suffice, and men forgotten that were.
  Time and the Gods are at strife; ye dwell in the midst thereof,
  Draining a little life from the barren breasts of love.
  I say to you, cease, take rest; yea, I say to you all, be at peace,
  Till the bitter milk of her breast and the barren bosom shall cease.
  Wilt thou yet take all, Galilean? but these thou shalt not take,
  The laurel, the palms and the pæan, the breasts of the nymphs in the
      brake;
  Breasts more soft than a dove's, that tremble with tenderer breath;
  And all the wings of the Loves, and all the joy before death;
  All the feet of the hours that sound as a single lyre,
  Dropped and deep in the flowers, with strings that flicker like fire.
  More than these wilt thou give, things fairer than all these things?
  Nay, for a little we live, and life hath mutable wings.
  A little while and we die; shall life not thrive as it may?
  For no man under the sky lives twice, outliving his day.
  And grief is a grievous thing, and a man hath enough of his tears:
  Why should he labour, and bring fresh grief to blacken his years?
  Thou hast conquered, O pale Galilean; the world has grown grey from
      thy breath;
  We have drunken of things Lethean, and fed on the fullness of death.
  Laurel is green for a season, and love is sweet for a day;
  But love grows bitter with treason, and laurel outlives not May.
  Sleep, shall we sleep after all? for the world is not sweet in the
      end;
  For the old faiths loosen and fall, the new years ruin and rend.
  Fate is a sea without shore, and the soul is a rock that abides;
  But her ears are vexed with the roar and her face with the foam of the
      tides.
  O lips that the live blood faints in, the leavings of racks and rods!
  O ghastly glories of saints, dead limbs of gibbeted Gods!
  Though all men abase them before you in spirit, and all knees bend,
  I kneel not neither adore you, but standing, look to the end.
  All delicate days and pleasant, all spirits and sorrows are cast
  Far out with the foam of the present that sweeps to the surf of the
      past:
  Where beyond the extreme sea-wall, and between the remote sea-gates,
  Waste water washes, and tall ships founder, and deep death waits:
  Where, mighty with deepening sides, clad about with the seas as with
      wings,
  And impelled of invisible tides, and fulfilled of unspeakable things,
  White-eyed and poisonous-finned, shark-toothed and serpentine-curled,
  Rolls, under the whitening wind of the future, the wave of the world.
  The depths stand naked in sunder behind it, the storms flee away;
  In the hollow before it the thunder is taken and snared as a prey;
  In its sides is the north-wind bound; and its salt is of all men's
      tears;
  With light of ruin, and sound of changes, and pulse of years:
  With travail of day after day, and with trouble of hour upon hour;
  And bitter as blood is the spray; and the crests are as fangs that
      devour:
  And its vapour and storm of its steam as the sighing of spirits to be;
  And its noise as the noise in a dream; and its depth as the roots of
      the sea:
  And the height of its heads as the height of the utmost stars of the
      air:
  And the ends of the earth at the might thereof tremble, and time is
      made bare.
  Will ye bridle the deep sea with reins, will ye chasten the high sea
      with rods?
  Will ye take her to chain her with chains, who is older than all ye
      Gods?
  All ye as a wind shall go by, as a fire shall ye pass and be past;
  Ye are Gods, and behold, ye shall die, and the waves be upon you at
      last.
  In the darkness of time, in the deeps of the years, in the changes of
      things,
  Ye shall sleep as a slain man sleeps, and the world shall forget you
      for kings.
  Though the feet of thine high priests tread where thy lords and our
      forefathers trod,
  Though these that were Gods are dead, and thou being dead art a God,
  Though before thee the throned Cytherean be fallen, and hidden her
      head,
  Yet thy kingdom shall pass, Galilean, thy dead shall go down to thee
      dead.
  Of the maiden thy mother men sing as a goddess with grace clad around;
  Thou art throned where another was king; where another was queen she
      is crowned.
  Yea, once we had sight of another: but now she is queen, say these.
  Not as thine, not as thine was our mother, a blossom of flowering
      seas,
  Clothed round with the world's desire as with raiment, and fair as the
      foam,
  And fleeter than kindled fire, and a goddess, and mother of Rome.
  For thine came pale and a maiden, and sister to sorrow; but ours,
  Her deep hair heavily laden with odour and colour of flowers,
  White rose of the rose-white water, a silver splendour, a flame,
  Bent down unto us that besought her, and earth grew sweet with her
      name.
  For thine came weeping, a slave among slaves, and rejected; but she
  Came flushed from the full-flushed wave, and imperial, her foot on the
      sea.
  And the wonderful waters knew her, the winds and the viewless ways,
  And the roses grew rosier, and bluer the sea-blue stream of the bays.
  Ye are fallen, our lords, by what token? we wist that ye should not
      fall.
  Ye were all so fair that are broken; and one more fair than ye all.
  But I turn to her still, having seen she shall surely abide in the
      end;
  Goddess and maiden and queen, be near me now and befriend.
  O daughter of earth, of my mother, her crown and blossom of birth,
  I am also, I also, thy brother; I go as I came unto earth.
  In the night where thine eyes are as moons are in heaven, the night
      where thou art,
  Where the silence is more than all tunes, where sleep overflows from
      the heart,
  Where the poppies are sweet as the rose in our world, and the red rose
      is white,
  And the wind falls faint as it blows with the fume of the flowers of
      the night,
  And the murmur of spirits that sleep in the shadow of Gods from afar
  Grows dim in thine ears and deep as the deep dim soul of a star,
  In the sweet low light of thy face, under heavens untrod by the sun,
  Let my soul with their souls find place, and forget what is done and
      undone.
  Thou art more than the Gods who number the days of our temporal
      breath:
  For these give labour and slumber; but thou, Proserpina, death.
  Therefore now at thy feet I abide for a season in silence. I know
  I shall die as my fathers died, and sleep as they sleep; even so.
  For the glass of the years is brittle wherein we gaze for a span;
  A little soul for a little bears up this corpse which is man.[2]
  So long I endure, no longer; and laugh not again, neither weep.
  For there is no God found stronger than death; and death is a sleep.

    [2] [Greek: psycharion ei bastazon nekron].
                                          EPICTETUS.




ILICET


  There is an end of joy and sorrow;
  Peace all day long, all night, all morrow,
    But never a time to laugh or weep.
  The end is come of pleasant places,
  The end of tender words and faces,
    The end of all, the poppied sleep.

  No place for sound within their hearing,
  No room to hope, no time for fearing,
    No lips to laugh, no lids for tears.
  The old years have run out all their measure;
  No chance of pain, no chance of pleasure,
    No fragment of the broken years.

  Outside of all the worlds and ages,
  There where the fool is as the sage is,
    There where the slayer is clean of blood,
  No end, no passage, no beginning,
  There where the sinner leaves off sinning,
    There where the good man is not good.

  There is not one thing with another,
  But Evil saith to Good: My brother,
    My brother, I am one with thee:
  They shall not strive nor cry for ever:
  No man shall choose between them: never
    Shall this thing end and that thing be.

  Wind wherein seas and stars are shaken
  Shall shake them, and they shall not waken;
    None that has lain down shall arise;
  The stones are sealed across their places;
  One shadow is shed on all their faces,
    One blindness cast on all their eyes.

  Sleep, is it sleep perchance that covers
  Each face, as each face were his lover's?
    Farewell; as men that sleep fare well.
  The grave's mouth laughs unto derision
  Desire and dread and dream and vision,
    Delight of heaven and sorrow of hell.

  No soul shall tell nor lip shall number
  The names and tribes of you that slumber;
    No memory, no memorial.
  "Thou knowest"--who shall say thou knowest?
  There is none highest and none lowest:
    An end, an end, an end of all.

  Good night, good sleep, good rest from sorrow
  To these that shall not have good morrow;
    The gods be gentle to all these.
  Nay, if death be not, how shall they be?
  Nay, is there help in heaven? it may be
    All things and lords of things shall cease.

  The stooped urn, filling, dips and flashes;
  The bronzèd brims are deep in ashes;
    The pale old lips of death are fed.
  Shall this dust gather flesh hereafter?
  Shall one shed tears or fall to laughter,
    At sight of all these poor old dead?

  Nay, as thou wilt; these know not of it;
  Thine eyes' strong weeping shall not profit,
    Thy laughter shall not give thee ease;
  Cry aloud, spare not, cease not crying,
  Sigh, till thou cleave thy sides with sighing,
    Thou shalt not raise up one of these.

  Burnt spices flash, and burnt wine hisses,
  The breathing flame's mouth curls and kisses
    The small dried rows of frankincense;
  All round the sad red blossoms smoulder,
  Flowers coloured like the fire, but colder,
    In sign of sweet things taken hence;

  Yea, for their sake and in death's favour
  Things of sweet shape and of sweet savour
    We yield them, spice and flower and wine;
  Yea, costlier things than wine or spices,
  Whereof none knoweth how great the price is,
    And fruit that comes not of the vine.

  From boy's pierced throat and girl's pierced bosom
  Drips, reddening round the blood-red blossom,
    The slow delicious bright soft blood,
  Bathing the spices and the pyre,
  Bathing the flowers and fallen fire,
    Bathing the blossom by the bud.

  Roses whose lips the flame has deadened
  Drink till the lapping leaves are reddened
    And warm wet inner petals weep;
  The flower whereof sick sleep gets leisure,
  Barren of balm and purple pleasure,
    Fumes with no native steam of sleep.

  Why will ye weep? what do ye weeping?
  For waking folk and people sleeping,
    And sands that fill and sands that fall,
  The days rose-red, the poppied hours,
  Blood, wine, and spice and fire and flowers,
    There is one end of one and all.

  Shall such an one lend love or borrow?
  Shall these be sorry for thy sorrow?
    Shall these give thanks for words or breath?
  Their hate is as their loving-kindness;
  The frontlet of their brows is blindness,
    The armlet of their arms is death.

  Lo, for no noise or light of thunder
  Shall these grave-clothes be rent in sunder;
    He that hath taken, shall he give?
  He hath rent them: shall he bind together?
  He hath bound them: shall he break the tether?
    He hath slain them: shall he bid them live?

  A little sorrow, a little pleasure,
  Fate metes us from the dusty measure
    That holds the date of all of us;
  We are born with travail and strong crying,
  And from the birth-day to the dying
    The likeness of our life is thus.

  One girds himself to serve another,
  Whose father was the dust, whose mother
    The little dead red worm therein;
  They find no fruit of things they cherish;
  The goodness of a man shall perish,
    It shall be one thing with his sin.

  In deep wet ways by grey old gardens
  Fed with sharp spring the sweet fruit hardens;
    They know not what fruits wane or grow;
  Red summer burns to the utmost ember;
  They know not, neither can remember,
    The old years and flowers they used to know.

  Ah, for their sakes, so trapped and taken,
  For theirs, forgotten and forsaken,
    Watch, sleep not, gird thyself with prayer.
  Nay, where the heart of wrath is broken,
  Where long love ends as a thing spoken,
    How shall thy crying enter there?

  Though the iron sides of the old world falter,
  The likeness of them shall not alter
    For all the rumour of periods,
  The stars and seasons that come after,
  The tears of latter men, the laughter
    Of the old unalterable gods.

  Far up above the years and nations,
  The high gods, clothed and crowned with patience,
    Endure through days of deathlike date;
  They bear the witness of things hidden;
  Before their eyes all life stands chidden,
    As they before the eyes of Fate.

  Not for their love shall Fate retire,
  Nor they relent for our desire,
    Nor the graves open for their call.
  The end is more than joy and anguish,
  Than lives that laugh and lives that languish,
    The poppied sleep, the end of all.




HERMAPHRODITUS


  I

  Lift up thy lips, turn round, look back for love,
    Blind love that comes by night and casts out rest;
    Of all things tired thy lips look weariest,
  Save the long smile that they are wearied of.
  Ah sweet, albeit no love be sweet enough,
    Choose of two loves and cleave unto the best;
    Two loves at either blossom of thy breast
  Strive until one be under and one above.
  Their breath is fire upon the amorous air,
    Fire in thine eyes and where thy lips suspire:
  And whosoever hath seen thee, being so fair,
    Two things turn all his life and blood to fire;
  A strong desire begot on great despair,
    A great despair cast out by strong desire.


  II

  Where between sleep and life some brief space is,
    With love like gold bound round about the head,
    Sex to sweet sex with lips and limbs is wed,
  Turning the fruitful feud of hers and his
  To the waste wedlock of a sterile kiss;
    Yet from them something like as fire is shed
    That shall not be assuaged till death be dead,
  Though neither life nor sleep can find out this.
  Love made himself of flesh that perisheth
    A pleasure-house for all the loves his kin;
  But on the one side sat a man like death,
    And on the other a woman sat like sin.
  So with veiled eyes and sobs between his breath
    Love turned himself and would not enter in.


  III

  Love, is it love or sleep or shadow or light
    That lies between thine eyelids and thine eyes?
    Like a flower laid upon a flower it lies,
  Or like the night's dew laid upon the night.
  Love stands upon thy left hand and thy right,
  Yet by no sunset and by no moonrise
    Shall make thee man and ease a woman's sighs,
    Or make thee woman for a man's delight.
  To what strange end hath some strange god made fair
    The double blossom of two fruitless flowers?
  Hid love in all the folds of all thy hair,
    Fed thee on summers, watered thee with showers,
  Given all the gold that all the seasons wear
    To thee that art a thing of barren hours?


  IV

  Yea, love, I see; it is not love but fear.
    Nay, sweet, it is not fear but love, I know;
    Or wherefore should thy body's blossom blow
  So sweetly, or thine eyelids leave so clear
  Thy gracious eyes that never made a tear--
    Though for their love our tears like blood should flow,
    Though love and life and death should come and go,
  So dreadful, so desirable, so dear?
  Yea, sweet, I know; I saw in what swift wise
    Beneath the woman's and the water's kiss
    Thy moist limbs melted into Salmacis,
  And the large light turned tender in thine eyes,
  And all thy boy's breath softened into sighs;
    But Love being blind, how should he know of this?

    _Au Musée du Louvre, Mars 1863._




FRAGOLETTA


  O Love! what shall be said of thee?
  The son of grief begot by joy?
  Being sightless, wilt thou see?
  Being sexless, wilt thou be
  Maiden or boy?

  I dreamed of strange lips yesterday
  And cheeks wherein the ambiguous blood
  Was like a rose's--yea,
  A rose's when it lay
  Within the bud.

  What fields have bred thee, or what groves
  Concealed thee, O mysterious flower,
  O double rose of Love's,
  With leaves that lure the doves
  From bud to bower?

  I dare not kiss it, lest my lip
  Press harder than an indrawn breath,
  And all the sweet life slip
  Forth, and the sweet leaves drip,
  Bloodlike, in death.

  O sole desire of my delight!
  O sole delight of my desire!
  Mine eyelids and eyesight
  Feed on thee day and night
  Like lips of fire.

  Lean back thy throat of carven pearl,
  Let thy mouth murmur like the dove's;
  Say, Venus hath no girl,
  No front of female curl,
  Among her Loves.

  Thy sweet low bosom, thy close hair,
  Thy strait soft flanks and slenderer feet,
  Thy virginal strange air,
  Are these not over fair
  For Love to greet?

  How should he greet thee? what new name,
  Fit to move all men's hearts, could move
  Thee, deaf to love or shame,
  Love's sister, by the same
  Mother as Love?

  Ah sweet, the maiden's mouth is cold,
  Her breast-blossoms are simply red,
  Her hair mere brown or gold,
  Fold over simple fold
  Binding her head.

  Thy mouth is made of fire and wine,
  Thy barren bosom takes my kiss
  And turns my soul to thine
  And turns thy lip to mine,
  And mine it is.

  Thou hast a serpent in thine hair,
  In all the curls that close and cling;
  And ah, thy breast-flower!
  Ah love, thy mouth too fair
  To kiss and sting!

  Cleave to me, love me, kiss mine eyes,
  Satiate thy lips with loving me;
  Nay, for thou shalt not rise;
  Lie still as Love that dies
  For love of thee.

  Mine arms are close about thine head,
  My lips are fervent on thy face,
  And where my kiss hath fed
  Thy flower-like blood leaps red
  To the kissed place.

  O bitterness of things too sweet!
  O broken singing of the dove!
  Love's wings are over fleet,
  And like the panther's feet
  The feet of Love.




RONDEL


  These many years since we began to be,
  What have the gods done with us? what with me,
  What with my love? they have shown me fates and fears,
  Harsh springs, and fountains bitterer than the sea,
  Grief a fixed star, and joy a vane that veers,
    These many years.

  With her, my love, with her have they done well?
  But who shall answer for her? who shall tell
  Sweet things or sad, such things as no man hears?
  May no tears fall, if no tears ever fell,
  From eyes more dear to me than starriest spheres
    These many years!

  But if tears ever touched, for any grief,
  Those eyelids folded like a white-rose leaf,
  Deep double shells wherethrough the eye-flower peers,
  Let them weep once more only, sweet and brief,
  Brief tears and bright, for one who gave her tears
    These many years.




SATIA TE SANGUINE


  If you loved me ever so little,
    I could bear the bonds that gall,
  I could dream the bonds were brittle;
    You do not love me at all.

  O beautiful lips, O bosom
    More white than the moon's and warm,
  A sterile, a ruinous blossom
    Is blown your way in a storm.

  As the lost white feverish limbs
    Of the Lesbian Sappho, adrift
  In foam where the sea-weed swims,
    Swam loose for the streams to lift,

  My heart swims blind in a sea
    That stuns me; swims to and fro,
  And gathers to windward and lee
    Lamentation, and mourning, and woe.

  A broken, an emptied boat,
    Sea saps it, winds blow apart,
  Sick and adrift and afloat,
    The barren waif of a heart.

  Where, when the gods would be cruel,
    Do they go for a torture? where
  Plant thorns, set pain like a jewel?
    Ah, not in the flesh, not there!

  The racks of earth and the rods
    Are weak as foam on the sands;
  In the heart is the prey for gods,
    Who crucify hearts, not hands.

  Mere pangs corrode and consume,
    Dead when life dies in the brain;
  In the infinite spirit is room
    For the pulse of an infinite pain.

  I wish you were dead, my dear;
    I would give you, had I to give
  Some death too bitter to fear;
    It is better to die than live.

  I wish you were stricken of thunder
    And burnt with a bright flame through,
  Consumed and cloven in sunder,
    I dead at your feet like you.

  If I could but know after all,
    I might cease to hunger and ache,
  Though your heart were ever so small,
    If it were not a stone or a snake.

  You are crueller, you that we love,
    Than hatred, hunger, or death;
  You have eyes and breasts like a dove,
    And you kill men's hearts with a breath

  As plague in a poisonous city
    Insults and exults on her dead,
  So you, when pallid for pity
    Comes love, and fawns to be fed.

  As a tame beast writhes and wheedles,
    He fawns to be fed with wiles;
  You carve him a cross of needles,
    And whet them sharp as your smiles.

  He is patient of thorn and whip,
    He is dumb under axe or dart;
  You suck with a sleepy red lip
    The wet red wounds in his heart.

  You thrill as his pulses dwindle,
    You brighten and warm as he bleeds,
  With insatiable eyes that kindle
    And insatiable mouth that feeds.

  Your hands nailed love to the tree,
    You stript him, scourged him with rods,
  And drowned him deep in the sea
    That hides the dead and their gods.

  And for all this, die will he not;
    There is no man sees him but I;
  You came and went and forgot;
    I hope he will some day die.




A LITANY

  [Greek: en ouranô phaennas
  krypsô par' hymin augas,
  mias pro nyktos hepta nyktas hexete, k.t.l.]
                                       _Anth. Sac._


  FIRST ANTIPHONE

  All the bright lights of heaven
      I will make dark over thee;
  One night shall be as seven
      That its skirts may cover thee;
  I will send on thy strong men a sword,
      On thy remnant a rod;
  Ye shall know that I am the Lord,
      Saith the Lord God.


  SECOND ANTIPHONE

  All the bright lights of heaven
      Thou hast made dark over us;
  One night has been as seven
      That its skirt might cover us;
  Thou hast sent on our strong men a sword,
      On our remnant a rod;
  We know that thou art the Lord,
      O Lord our God.


  THIRD ANTIPHONE

  As the tresses and wings of the wind
      Are scattered and shaken,
  I will scatter all them that have sinned,
      There shall none be taken;
  As a sower that scattereth seed,
      So will I scatter them;
  As one breaketh and shattereth a reed,
      I will break and shatter them.


  FOURTH ANTIPHONE

  As the wings and the locks of the wind
      Are scattered and shaken,
  Thou hast scattered all them that have sinned,
      There was no man taken;
  As a sower that scattereth seed,
      So hast thou scattered us;
  As one breaketh and shattereth a reed,
      Thou hast broken and shattered us.


  FIFTH ANTIPHONE

  From all thy lovers that love thee
      I God will sunder thee;
  I will make darkness above thee,
      And thick darkness under thee;
  Before me goeth a light,
      Behind me a sword;
  Shall a remnant find grace in my sight?
      I am the Lord.


  SIXTH ANTIPHONE

  From all our lovers that love us
      Thou God didst sunder us;
  Thou madest darkness above us,
      And thick darkness under us;
  Thou hast kindled thy wrath for a light,
      And made ready thy sword;
  Let a remnant find grace in thy sight,
      We beseech thee, O Lord.


  SEVENTH ANTIPHONE

  Wilt thou bring fine gold for a payment
      For sins on this wise?
  For the glittering of raiment
      And the shining of eyes,
  For the painting of faces
      And the sundering of trust,
  For the sins of thine high places
      And delight of thy lust?

  For your high things ye shall have lowly,
      Lamentation for song;
  For, behold, I God am holy,
      I the Lord am strong;
  Ye shall seek me and shall not reach me
      Till the wine-press be trod;
  In that hour ye shall turn and beseech me,
      Saith the Lord God.


  EIGHTH ANTIPHONE

  Not with fine gold for a payment,
      But with coin of sighs,
  But with rending of raiment
      And with weeping of eyes,
  But with shame of stricken faces
      And with strewing of dust,
  For the sin of stately places
      And lordship of lust;

  With voices of men made lowly,
      Made empty of song,
  O Lord God most holy,
      O God most strong,
  We reach out hands to reach thee
      Ere the wine-press be trod;
  We beseech thee, O Lord, we beseech thee,
      O Lord our God.


  NINTH ANTIPHONE

  In that hour thou shalt say to the night,
      Come down and cover us;
  To the cloud on thy left and thy right,
      Be thou spread over us;
  A snare shall be as thy mother,
      And a curse thy bride;
  Thou shalt put her away, and another
      Shall lie by thy side.

  Thou shalt neither rise up by day
      Nor lie down by night;
  Would God it were dark! thou shalt say;
      Would God it were light!
  And the sight of thine eyes shall be made
      As the burning of fire;
  And thy soul shall be sorely afraid
      For thy soul's desire.

  Ye whom your lords loved well,
      Putting silver and gold on you,
  The inevitable hell
      Shall surely take hold on you;
  Your gold shall be for a token,
      Your staff for a rod;
  With the breaking of bands ye are broken,
      Saith the Lord God.


  TENTH ANTIPHONE

  In our sorrow we said to the night,
      Fall down and cover us;
  To the darkness at left and at right,
      Be thou shed over us;
  We had breaking of spirit to mother
      And cursing to bride;
  And one was slain, and another
      Stood up at our side.

  We could not arise by day,
      Nor lie down by night;
  Thy sword was sharp in our way,
      Thy word in our sight;
  The delight of our eyelids was made
      As the burning of fire;
  And our souls became sorely afraid
      For our soul's desire.

  We whom the world loved well,
      Laying silver and gold on us,
  The kingdom of death and of hell
      Riseth up to take hold on us;
  Our gold is turned to a token,
      Our staff to a rod;
  Yet shalt thou bind them up that were broken,
      O Lord our God.




A LAMENTATION


  I

  Who hath known the ways of time
    Or trodden behind his feet?
      There is no such man among men.
  For chance overcomes him, or crime
    Changes; for all things sweet
      In time wax bitter again.
  Who shall give sorrow enough,
    Or who the abundance of tears?
  Mine eyes are heavy with love
    And a sword gone thorough mine ears,
      A sound like a sword and fire,
      For pity, for great desire;
  Who shall ensure me thereof,
    Lest I die, being full of my fears?

  Who hath known the ways and the wrath,
    The sleepless spirit, the root
      And blossom of evil will,
        The divine device of a god?
  Who shall behold it or hath?
    The twice-tongued prophets are mute,
      The many speakers are still;
        No foot has travelled or trod,
  No hand has meted, his path.
    Man's fate is a blood-red fruit,
      And the mighty gods have their fill
        And relax not the rein, or the rod.

  Ye were mighty in heart from of old,
    Ye slew with the spear, and are slain.
  Keen after heat is the cold,
    Sore after summer is rain,
  And melteth man to the bone.
    As water he weareth away,
    As a flower, as an hour in a day,
  Fallen from laughter to moan.
  But my spirit is shaken with fear
    Lest an evil thing begin,
  New-born, a spear for a spear,
    And one for another sin.
  Or ever our tears began,
    It was known from of old and said;
  One law for a living man,
    And another law for the dead.
  For these are fearful and sad,
    Vain, and things without breath;
      While he lives let a man be glad,
        For none hath joy of his death.


  II

  Who hath known the pain, the old pain of earth,
    Or all the travail of the sea,
  The many ways and waves, the birth
  Fruitless, the labour nothing worth?
    Who hath known, who knoweth, O gods? not we.
  There is none shall say he hath seen,
    There is none he hath known.
  Though he saith, Lo, a lord have I been,
    I have reaped and sown;
  I have seen the desire of mine eyes,
    The beginning of love,
  The season of kisses and sighs
    And the end thereof.
  I have known the ways of the sea,
    All the perilous ways,
  Strange winds have spoken with me,
    And the tongues of strange days.
  I have hewn the pine for ships;
    Where steeds run arow,
  I have seen from their bridled lips
    Foam blown as the snow.
  With snapping of chariot-poles
    And with straining of oars
  I have grazed in the race the goals,
    In the storm the shores;
  As a greave is cleft with an arrow
    At the joint of the knee,
  I have cleft through the sea-straits narrow
    To the heart of the sea.
  When air was smitten in sunder
    I have watched on high
  The ways of the stars and the thunder
    In the night of the sky;
  Where the dark brings forth light as a flower,
    As from lips that dissever;
  One abideth the space of an hour,
    One endureth for ever.
  Lo, what hath he seen or known,
    Of the way and the wave
  Unbeholden, unsailed on, unsown,
    From the breast to the grave?

  Or ever the stars were made, or skies,
    Grief was born, and the kinless night,
      Mother of gods without form or name.
  And light is born out of heaven and dies,
    And one day knows not another's light,
      But night is one, and her shape the same.

  But dumb the goddesses underground
    Wait, and we hear not on earth if their feet
      Rise, and the night wax loud with their wings;
  Dumb, without word or shadow of sound;
    And sift in scales and winnow as wheat
      Men's souls, and sorrow of manifold things.


  III

  Nor less of grief than ours
    The gods wrought long ago
      To bruise men one by one;
  But with the incessant hours
    Fresh grief and greener woe
      Spring, as the sudden sun
  Year after year makes flowers;
    And these die down and grow,
      And the next year lacks none.

  As these men sleep, have slept
    The old heroes in time fled,
      No dream-divided sleep;
  And holier eyes have wept
    Than ours, when on her dead
      Gods have seen Thetis weep,
  With heavenly hair far-swept
    Back, heavenly hands outspread
      Round what she could not keep,

  Could not one day withhold,
    One night; and like as these
      White ashes of no weight,
  Held not his urn the cold
    Ashes of Heracles?
      For all things born one gate
  Opens, no gate of gold;
    Opens; and no man sees
      Beyond the gods and fate.




ANIMA ANCEPS


  Till death have broken
  Sweet life's love-token,
  Till all be spoken
    That shall be said,
  What dost thou praying,
  O soul, and playing
  With song and saying,
    Things flown and fled?
  For this we know not--
  That fresh springs flow not
  And fresh griefs grow not
    When men are dead;
  When strange years cover
  Lover and lover,
  And joys are over
    And tears are shed.

  If one day's sorrow
  Mar the day's morrow--
  If man's life borrow
    And man's death pay--
  If souls once taken,
  If lives once shaken,
  Arise, awaken,
    By night, by day--
  Why with strong crying
  And years of sighing,
  Living and dying,
    Fast ye and pray?
  For all your weeping,
  Waking and sleeping,
  Death comes to reaping
    And takes away.

  Though time rend after
  Roof-tree from rafter,
  A little laughter
    Is much more worth
  Than thus to measure
  The hour, the treasure,
  The pain, the pleasure,
    The death, the birth;
  Grief, when days alter,
  Like joy shall falter;
  Song-book and psalter,
    Mourning and mirth.
  Live like the swallow;
  Seek not to follow
  Where earth is hollow
    Under the earth.




IN THE ORCHARD

(PROVENÇAL BURDEN)


  Leave go my hands, let me catch breath and see;
  Let the dew-fall drench either side of me;
  Clear apple-leaves are soft upon that moon
  Seen sidelong like a blossom in the tree;
  Ah God, ah God, that day should be so soon.

  The grass is thick and cool, it lets us lie.
  Kissed upon either cheek and either eye,
  I turn to thee as some green afternoon
  Turns toward sunset, and is loth to die;
  Ah God, ah God, that day should be so soon.

  Lie closer, lean your face upon my side,
  Feel where the dew fell that has hardly dried,
  Hear how the blood beats that went nigh to swoon;
  The pleasure lives there when the sense has died;
  Ah God, ah God, that day should be so soon.

  O my fair lord, I charge you leave me this:
  Is it not sweeter than a foolish kiss?
  Nay take it then, my flower, my first in June,
  My rose, so like a tender mouth it is:
  Ah God, ah God, that day should be so soon.

  Love, till dawn sunder night from day with fire,
  Dividing my delight and my desire,
  The crescent life and love the plenilune,
  Love me though dusk begin and dark retire;
  Ah God, ah God, that day should be so soon.

  Ah, my heart fails, my blood draws back; I know,
  When life runs over, life is near to go;
  And with the slain of love love's ways are strewn,
  And with their blood, if love will have it so;
  Ah God, ah God, that day should be so soon.

  Ah, do thy will now; slay me if thou wilt;
  There is no building now the walls are built,
  No quarrying now the corner-stone is hewn,
  No drinking now the vine's whole blood is spilt;
  Ah God, ah God, that day should be so soon.

  Nay, slay me now; nay, for I will be slain;
  Pluck thy red pleasure from the teeth of pain,
  Break down thy vine ere yet grape-gatherers prune,
  Slay me ere day can slay desire again;
  Ah God, ah God, that day should be so soon.

  Yea, with thy sweet lips, with thy sweet sword; yea,
  Take life and all, for I will die, I say;
  Love, I gave love, is life a better boon?
  For sweet night's sake I will not live till day;
  Ah God, ah God, that day should be so soon.

  Nay, I will sleep then only; nay, but go.
  Ah sweet, too sweet to me, my sweet, I know
  Love, sleep, and death go to the sweet same tune;
  Hold my hair fast, and kiss me through it so.
  Ah God, ah God, that day should be so soon.




A MATCH


  If love were what the rose is,
    And I were like the leaf,
  Our lives would grow together
  In sad or singing weather,
  Blown fields or flowerful closes,
    Green pleasure or grey grief;
  If love were what the rose is,
    And I were like the leaf.

  If I were what the words are,
    And love were like the tune,
  With double sound and single
  Delight our lips would mingle,
  With kisses glad as birds are
    That get sweet rain at noon;
  If I were what the words are,
    And love were like the tune.

  If you were life, my darling,
    And I your love were death,
  We'd shine and snow together
  Ere March made sweet the weather
  With daffodil and starling
    And hours of fruitful breath;
  If you were life, my darling,
    And I your love were death.

  If you were thrall to sorrow,
    And I were page to joy,
  We'd play for lives and seasons
  With loving looks and treasons
  And tears of night and morrow
    And laughs of maid and boy;
  If you were thrall to sorrow,
    And I were page to joy.

  If you were April's lady,
    And I were lord in May,
  We'd throw with leaves for hours
  And draw for days with flowers,
  Till day like night were shady
    And night were bright like day;
  If you were April's lady,
    And I were lord in May.

  If you were queen of pleasure,
    And I were king of pain,
  We'd hunt down love together,
  Pluck out his flying-feather,
  And teach his feet a measure,
    And find his mouth a rein;
  If you were queen of pleasure,
    And I were king of pain.




FAUSTINE

_Ave Faustina Imperatrix, morituri te salutant._


  Lean back, and get some minutes' peace;
    Let your head lean
  Back to the shoulder with its fleece
    Of locks, Faustine.

  The shapely silver shoulder stoops,
    Weighed over clean
  With state of splendid hair that droops
    Each side, Faustine.

  Let me go over your good gifts
    That crown you queen;
  A queen whose kingdom ebbs and shifts
    Each week, Faustine.

  Bright heavy brows well gathered up:
    White gloss and sheen;
  Carved lips that make my lips a cup
    To drink, Faustine,

  Wine and rank poison, milk and blood,
    Being mixed therein
  Since first the devil threw dice with God
    For you, Faustine.

  Your naked new-born soul, their stake,
    Stood blind between;
  God said "let him that wins her take
    And keep Faustine."

  But this time Satan throve, no doubt;
    Long since, I ween,
  God's part in you was battered out;
    Long since, Faustine.

  The die rang sideways as it fell,
    Rang cracked and thin,
  Like a man's laughter heard in hell
    Far down, Faustine,

  A shadow of laughter like a sigh,
    Dead sorrow's kin;
  So rang, thrown down, the devil's die
    That won Faustine.

  A suckling of his breed you were,
    One hard to wean;
  But God, who lost you, left you fair,
    We see, Faustine.

  You have the face that suits a woman
    For her soul's screen--
  The sort of beauty that's called human
    In hell, Faustine.

  You could do all things but be good
    Or chaste of mien;
  And that you would not if you could,
    We know, Faustine.

  Even he who cast seven devils out
    Of Magdalene
  Could hardly do as much, I doubt,
    For you, Faustine.

  Did Satan make you to spite God?
    Or did God mean
  To scourge with scorpions for a rod
    Our sins, Faustine?

  I know what queen at first you were,
    As though I had seen
  Red gold and black imperious hair
    Twice crown Faustine.

  As if your fed sarcophagus
    Spared flesh and skin,
  You come back face to face with us,
    The same Faustine.

  She loved the games men played with death,
    Where death must win;
  As though the slain man's blood and breath
    Revived Faustine.

  Nets caught the pike, pikes tore the net;
    Lithe limbs and lean
  From drained-out pores dripped thick red sweat
    To soothe Faustine.

  She drank the steaming drift and dust
    Blown off the scene;
  Blood could not ease the bitter lust
    That galled Faustine.

  All round the foul fat furrows reeked,
    Where blood sank in;
  The circus splashed and seethed and shrieked
    All round Faustine.

  But these are gone now: years entomb
    The dust and din;
  Yea, even the bath's fierce reek and fume
    That slew Faustine.

  Was life worth living then? and now
    Is life worth sin?
  Where are the imperial years? and how
    Are you Faustine?

  Your soul forgot her joys, forgot
    Her times of teen;
  Yea, this life likewise will you not
    Forget, Faustine?

  For in the time we know not of
    Did fate begin
  Weaving the web of days that wove
    Your doom, Faustine.

  The threads were wet with wine, and all
    Were smooth to spin;
  They wove you like a Bacchanal,
    The first Faustine.

  And Bacchus cast your mates and you
    Wild grapes to glean;
  Your flower-like lips were dashed with dew
    From his, Faustine.

  Your drenched loose hands were stretched to hold
    The vine's wet green,
  Long ere they coined in Roman gold
    Your face, Faustine.

  Then after change of soaring feather
    And winnowing fin,
  You woke in weeks of feverish weather,
    A new Faustine.

  A star upon your birthday burned,
    Whose fierce serene
  Red pulseless planet never yearned
    In heaven, Faustine.

  Stray breaths of Sapphic song that blew
    Through Mitylene
  Shook the fierce quivering blood in you
    By night, Faustine.

  The shameless nameless love that makes
    Hell's iron gin
  Shut on you like a trap that breaks
    The soul, Faustine.

  And when your veins were void and dead,
    What ghosts unclean
  Swarmed round the straitened barren bed
    That hid Faustine?

  What sterile growths of sexless root
    Or epicene?
  What flower of kisses without fruit
    Of love, Faustine?

  What adders came to shed their coats?
    What coiled obscene
  Small serpents with soft stretching throats
    Caressed Faustine?

  But the time came of famished hours,
    Maimed loves and mean,
  This ghastly thin-faced time of ours,
    To spoil Faustine.

  You seem a thing that hinges hold,
    A love-machine
  With clockwork joints of supple gold--
    No more, Faustine.

  Not godless, for you serve one God,
    The Lampsacene,
  Who metes the gardens with his rod;
    Your lord, Faustine.

  If one should love you with real love
    (Such things have been,
  Things your fair face knows nothing of,
    It seems, Faustine);

  That clear hair heavily bound back,
    The lights wherein
  Shift from dead blue to burnt-up black;
    Your throat, Faustine,

  Strong, heavy, throwing out the face
    And hard bright chin
  And shameful scornful lips that grace
    Their shame, Faustine,

  Curled lips, long-since half kissed away,
    Still sweet and keen;
  You'd give him--poison shall we say?
    Or what, Faustine?




A CAMEO


  There was a graven image of Desire
      Painted with red blood on a ground of gold
      Passing between the young men and the old,
  And by him Pain, whose body shone like fire,
  And Pleasure with gaunt hands that grasped their hire.
      Of his left wrist, with fingers clenched and cold,
      The insatiable Satiety kept hold,
  Walking with feet unshod that pashed the mire.
  The senses and the sorrows and the sins,
      And the strange loves that suck the breasts of Hate
  Till lips and teeth bite in their sharp indenture,
  Followed like beasts with flap of wings and fins.
      Death stood aloof behind a gaping grate,
  Upon whose lock was written _Peradventure_.




SONG BEFORE DEATH

(FROM THE FRENCH)

1795


  Sweet mother, in a minute's span
    Death parts thee and my love of thee;
  Sweet love, that yet art living man,
    Come back, true love, to comfort me.
  Back, ah, come back! ah wellaway!
  But my love comes not any day.

  As roses, when the warm West blows,
    Break to full flower and sweeten spring,
  My soul would break to a glorious rose
    In such wise at his whispering.
  In vain I listen; wellaway!
  My love says nothing any day.

  You that will weep for pity of love
    On the low place where I am lain,
  I pray you, having wept enough,
    Tell him for whom I bore such pain
  That he was yet, ah! wellaway!
  My true love to my dying day.




ROCOCO


  Take hands and part with laughter;
    Touch lips and part with tears;
  Once more and no more after,
    Whatever comes with years.
  We twain shall not remeasure
    The ways that left us twain;
  Nor crush the lees of pleasure
    From sanguine grapes of pain.

  We twain once well in sunder,
    What will the mad gods do
  For hate with me, I wonder,
    Or what for love with you?
  Forget them till November,
    And dream there's April yet;
  Forget that I remember,
    And dream that I forget.

  Time found our tired love sleeping,
    And kissed away his breath;
  But what should we do weeping,
    Though light love sleep to death?
  We have drained his lips at leisure,
    Till there's not left to drain
  A single sob of pleasure,
    A single pulse of pain.

  Dream that the lips once breathless
    Might quicken if they would;
  Say that the soul is deathless;
    Dream that the gods are good;
  Say March may wed September,
    And time divorce regret;
  But not that you remember,
    And not that I forget.

  We have heard from hidden places
    What love scarce lives and hears:
  We have seen on fervent faces
    The pallor of strange tears:
  We have trod the wine-vat's treasure,
    Whence, ripe to steam and stain,
  Foams round the feet of pleasure
    The blood-red must of pain.

  Remembrance may recover
    And time bring back to time
  The name of your first lover,
    The ring of my first rhyme;
  But rose-leaves of December
    The frosts of June shall fret,
  The day that you remember,
    The day that I forget.

  The snake that hides and hisses
    In heaven we twain have known;
  The grief of cruel kisses,
    The joy whose mouth makes moan;
  The pulse's pause and measure,
    Where in one furtive vein
  Throbs through the heart of pleasure
    The purpler blood of pain.

  We have done with tears and treasons
    And love for treason's sake;
  Room for the swift new seasons,
    The years that burn and break,
  Dismantle and dismember
    Men's days and dreams, Juliette;
  For love may not remember,
    But time will not forget.

  Life treads down love in flying,
    Time withers him at root;
  Bring all dead things and dying,
    Reaped sheaf and ruined fruit,
  Where, crushed by three days' pressure,
    Our three days' love lies slain;
  And earlier leaf of pleasure,
    And latter flower of pain.

  Breathe close upon the ashes,
    It may be flame will leap;
  Unclose the soft close lashes,
    Lift up the lids, and weep.
  Light love's extinguished ember,
    Let one tear leave it wet
  For one that you remember
    And ten that you forget.




STAGE LOVE


  When the game began between them for a jest,
  He played king and she played queen to match the best;
  Laughter soft as tears, and tears that turned to laughter,
  These were things she sought for years and sorrowed after.

  Pleasure with dry lips, and pain that walks by night;
  All the sting and all the stain of long delight;
  These were things she knew not of, that knew not of her,
  When she played at half a love with half a lover.

  Time was chorus, gave them cues to laugh or cry;
  They would kill, befool, amuse him, let him die;
  Set him webs to weave to-day and break to-morrow,
  Till he died for good in play, and rose in sorrow.

  What the years mean; how time dies and is not slain;
  How love grows and laughs and cries and wanes again;
  These were things she came to know, and take their measure,
  When the play was played out so for one man's pleasure.




THE LEPER


  Nothing is better, I well think,
    Than love; the hidden well-water
  Is not so delicate to drink:
    This was well seen of me and her.

  I served her in a royal house;
    I served her wine and curious meat.
  For will to kiss between her brows,
    I had no heart to sleep or eat.

  Mere scorn God knows she had of me,
    A poor scribe, nowise great or fair,
  Who plucked his clerk's hood back to see
    Her curled-up lips and amorous hair.

  I vex my head with thinking this.
    Yea, though God always hated me,
  And hates me now that I can kiss
    Her eyes, plait up her hair to see

  How she then wore it on the brows,
    Yet am I glad to have her dead
  Here in this wretched wattled house
    Where I can kiss her eyes and head.

  Nothing is better, I well know,
    Than love; no amber in cold sea
  Or gathered berries under snow:
    That is well seen of her and me.

  Three thoughts I make my pleasure of:
    First I take heart and think of this:
  That knight's gold hair she chose to love,
    His mouth she had such will to kiss.

  Then I remember that sundawn
    I brought him by a privy way
  Out at her lattice, and thereon
    What gracious words she found to say.

  (Cold rushes for such little feet--
    Both feet could lie into my hand.
  A marvel was it of my sweet
    Her upright body could so stand.)

  "Sweet friend, God give you thank and grace;
    Now am I clean and whole of shame,
  Nor shall men burn me in the face
    For my sweet fault that scandals them."

  I tell you over word by word.
    She, sitting edgewise on her bed,
  Holding her feet, said thus. The third,
    A sweeter thing than these, I said.

  God, that makes time and ruins it
    And alters not, abiding God,
  Changed with disease her body sweet,
    The body of love wherein she abode.

  Love is more sweet and comelier
    Than a dove's throat strained out to sing.
  All they spat out and cursed at her
    And cast her forth for a base thing.

  They cursed her, seeing how God had wrought
    This curse to plague her, a curse of his.
  Fools were they surely, seeing not
    How sweeter than all sweet she is.

  He that had held her by the hair,
    With kissing lips blinding her eyes,
  Felt her bright bosom, strained and bare,
    Sigh under him, with short mad cries

  Out of her throat and sobbing mouth
    And body broken up with love,
  With sweet hot tears his lips were loth
    Her own should taste the savour of,

  Yea, he inside whose grasp all night
    Her fervent body leapt or lay,
  Stained with sharp kisses red and white,
    Found her a plague to spurn away.

  I hid her in this wattled house,
    I served her water and poor bread.
  For joy to kiss between her brows
    Time upon time I was nigh dead.

  Bread failed; we got but well-water
    And gathered grass with dropping seed.
  I had such joy of kissing her,
    I had small care to sleep or feed.

  Sometimes when service made me glad
    The sharp tears leapt between my lids,
  Falling on her, such joy I had
    To do the service God forbids.

  "I pray you let me be at peace,
    Get hence, make room for me to die."
  She said that: her poor lip would cease,
    Put up to mine, and turn to cry.

  I said, "Bethink yourself how love
    Fared in us twain, what either did;
  Shall I unclothe my soul thereof?
    That I should do this, God forbid."

  Yea, though God hateth us, he knows
    That hardly in a little thing
  Love faileth of the work it does
    Till it grow ripe for gathering.

  Six months, and now my sweet is dead
    A trouble takes me; I know not
  If all were done well, all well said,
    No word or tender deed forgot.

  Too sweet, for the least part in her,
    To have shed life out by fragments; yet,
  Could the close mouth catch breath and stir,
    I might see something I forget.

  Six months, and I sit still and hold
    In two cold palms her cold two feet.
  Her hair, half grey half ruined gold,
    Thrills me and burns me in kissing it.

  Love bites and stings me through, to see
    Her keen face made of sunken bones.
  Her worn-off eyelids madden me,
    That were shot through with purple once.

  She said, "Be good with me; I grow
    So tired for shame's sake, I shall die
  If you say nothing:" even so.
    And she is dead now, and shame put by.

  Yea, and the scorn she had of me
    In the old time, doubtless vexed her then.
  I never should have kissed her. See
    What fools God's anger makes of men!

  She might have loved me a little too,
    Had I been humbler for her sake.
  But that new shame could make love new
    She saw not--yet her shame did make.

  I took too much upon my love,
    Having for such mean service done
  Her beauty and all the ways thereof,
    Her face and all the sweet thereon.

  Yea, all this while I tended her,
    I know the old love held fast his part:
  I know the old scorn waxed heavier,
    Mixed with sad wonder, in her heart.

  It may be all my love went wrong--
    A scribe's work writ awry and blurred,
  Scrawled after the blind evensong--
    Spoilt music with no perfect word.

  But surely I would fain have done
    All things the best I could. Perchance
  Because I failed, came short of one,
    She kept at heart that other man's.

  I am grown blind with all these things:
    It may be now she hath in sight
  Some better knowledge; still there clings
    The old question. Will not God do right?[3]

    [3] En ce temps-là estoyt dans ce pays grand nombre de ladres et
    de meseaulx, ce dont le roy eut grand desplaisir, veu que Dieu
    dust en estre moult griefvement courroucé. Ores il advint qu'une
    noble damoyselle appelée Yolande de Sallières estant atteincte et
    touste guastée de ce vilain mal, tous ses amys et ses parens ayant
    devant leurs yeux la paour de Dieu la firent issir fors de leurs
    maisons et oncques ne voulurent recepvoir ni reconforter chose
    mauldicte de Dieu et à tous les hommes puante et abhominable.
    Ceste dame avoyt esté moult belle et gracieuse de formes, et de
    son corps elle estoyt large et de vie lascive. Pourtant nul des
    amans qui l'avoyent souventesfois accollée et baisée moult
    tendrement ne voulust plus héberger si laide femme et si
    détestable pescheresse. Ung seul clerc qui feut premièrement son
    lacquays et son entremetteur en matière d'amour la reçut chez luy
    et la récéla dans une petite cabane. Là mourut la meschinette de
    grande misère et de male mort: et après elle décéda ledist clerc
    qui pour grand amour l'avoyt six mois durant soignée, lavée,
    habillée et deshabillée tous les jours de ses mains propres. Mesme
    dist-on que ce meschant homme et mauldict clerc se remémourant de
    la grande beauté passée et guastée de ceste femme se délectoyt
    maintesfois à la baiser sur sa bouche orde et lépreuse et
    l'accoller doulcement de ses mains amoureuses. Aussy est-il mort
    de ceste mesme maladie abhominable. Cecy advint près
    Fontainebellant en Gastinois. Et quand ouyt le roy Philippe ceste
    adventure moult en estoyt esmerveillé.

                                 _Grandes Chroniques de France, 1505._




A BALLAD OF BURDENS


  The burden of fair women. Vain delight,
    And love self-slain in some sweet shameful way,
  And sorrowful old age that comes by night
    As a thief comes that has no heart by day,
    And change that finds fair cheeks and leaves them grey,
  And weariness that keeps awake for hire,
    And grief that says what pleasure used to say;
  This is the end of every man's desire.

  The burden of bought kisses. This is sore,
    A burden without fruit in childbearing;
  Between the nightfall and the dawn threescore,
    Threescore between the dawn and evening.
    The shuddering in thy lips, the shuddering
  In thy sad eyelids tremulous like fire,
    Makes love seem shameful and a wretched thing,
  This is the end of every man's desire.

  The burden of sweet speeches. Nay, kneel down,
    Cover thy head, and weep; for verily
  These market-men that buy thy white and brown
    In the last days shall take no thought for thee.
    In the last days like earth thy face shall be,
  Yea, like sea-marsh made thick with brine and mire,
    Sad with sick leavings of the sterile sea.
  This is the end of every man's desire.

  The burden of long living. Thou shalt fear
    Waking, and sleeping mourn upon thy bed;
  And say at night "Would God the day were here,"
    And say at dawn "Would God the day were dead."
    With weary days thou shalt be clothed and fed,
  And wear remorse of heart for thine attire,
    Pain for thy girdle and sorrow upon thine head;
  This is the end of every man's desire.

  The burden of bright colours. Thou shalt see
    Gold tarnished, and the grey above the green;
  And as the thing thou seest thy face shall be,
    And no more as the thing beforetime seen.
    And thou shalt say of mercy "It hath been,"
  And living, watch the old lips and loves expire,
    And talking, tears shall take thy breath between;
  This is the end of every man's desire.

  The burden of sad sayings. In that day
    Thou shalt tell all thy days and hours, and tell
  Thy times and ways and words of love, and say
    How one was dear and one desirable,
    And sweet was life to hear and sweet to smell,
  But now with lights reverse the old hours retire
    And the last hour is shod with fire from hell;
  This is the end of every man's desire.

  The burden of four seasons. Rain in spring,
    White rain and wind among the tender trees;
  A summer of green sorrows gathering,
    Rank autumn in a mist of miseries,
    With sad face set towards the year, that sees
  The charred ash drop out of the dropping pyre,
    And winter wan with many maladies;
  This is the end of every man's desire.

  The burden of dead faces. Out of sight
    And out of love, beyond the reach of hands,
  Changed in the changing of the dark and light,
    They walk and weep about the barren lands
    Where no seed is nor any garner stands,
  Where in short breaths the doubtful days respire,
    And time's turned glass lets through the sighing sands;
  This is the end of every man's desire.

  The burden of much gladness. Life and lust
    Forsake thee, and the face of thy delight;
  And underfoot the heavy hour strews dust,
    And overhead strange weathers burn and bite;
    And where the red was, lo the bloodless white,
  And where truth was, the likeness of a liar,
    And where day was, the likeness of the night;
  This is the end of every man's desire.


  L'ENVOY

  Princes, and ye whom pleasure quickeneth,
    Heed well this rhyme before your pleasure tire;
  For life is sweet, but after life is death.
    This is the end of every man's desire.




RONDEL


  Kissing her hair I sat against her feet,
  Wove and unwove it, wound and found it sweet;
  Made fast therewith her hands, drew down her eyes,
  Deep as deep flowers and dreamy like dim skies;
  With her own tresses bound and found her fair,
      Kissing her hair.

  Sleep were no sweeter than her face to me,
  Sleep of cold sea-bloom under the cold sea;
  What pain could get between my face and hers?
  What new sweet thing would love not relish worse?
  Unless, perhaps, white death had kissed me there,
      Kissing her hair?




BEFORE THE MIRROR

(VERSES WRITTEN UNDER A PICTURE)

INSCRIBED TO J. A. WHISTLER


  I

  White rose in red rose-garden
    Is not so white;
  Snowdrops that plead for pardon
    And pine for fright
  Because the hard East blows
  Over their maiden rows
    Grow not as this face grows from pale to bright.

  Behind the veil, forbidden,
    Shut up from sight,
  Love, is there sorrow hidden,
    Is there delight?
  Is joy thy dower or grief,
  White rose of weary leaf,
    Late rose whose life is brief, whose loves are light?

  Soft snows that hard winds harden
    Till each flake bite
  Fill all the flowerless garden
    Whose flowers took flight
  Long since when summer ceased,
  And men rose up from feast,
    And warm west wind grew east, and warm day night.


  II

  "Come snow, come wind or thunder
    High up in air,
  I watch my face, and wonder
    At my bright hair;
  Nought else exalts or grieves
  The rose at heart, that heaves
    With love of her own leaves and lips that pair.

  "She knows not loves that kissed her
    She knows not where.
  Art thou the ghost, my sister,
    White sister there,
  Am I the ghost, who knows?
  My hand, a fallen rose,
    Lies snow-white on white snows, and takes no care.

  "I cannot see what pleasures
    Or what pains were;
  What pale new loves and treasures
    New years will bear;
  What beam will fall, what shower,
  What grief or joy for dower;
    But one thing-knows the flower; the flower is fair."


  III

  Glad, but not flushed with gladness,
    Since joys go by;
  Sad, but not bent with sadness,
    Since sorrows die;
  Deep in the gleaming glass
  She sees all past things pass,
    And all sweet life that was lie down and lie.

  There glowing ghosts of flowers
    Draw down, draw nigh;
  And wings of swift spent hours
    Take flight and fly;
  She sees by formless gleams,
  She hears across cold streams,
    Dead mouths of many dreams that sing and sigh.

  Face fallen and white throat lifted,
    With sleepless eye
  She sees old loves that drifted,
    She knew not why,
  Old loves and faded fears
  Float down a stream that hears
    The flowing of all men's tears beneath the sky.




EROTION


  Sweet for a little even to fear, and sweet,
  O love, to lay down fear at love's fair feet;
  Shall not some fiery memory of his breath
  Lie sweet on lips that touch the lips of death?
  Yet leave me not; yet, if thou wilt, be free;
  Love me no more, but love my love of thee.
  Love where thou wilt, and live thy life; and I,
  One thing I can, and one love cannot--die.
  Pass from me; yet thine arms, thine eyes, thine hair,
  Feed my desire and deaden my despair.
  Yet once more ere time change us, ere my cheek
  Whiten, ere hope be dumb or sorrow speak,
  Yet once more ere thou hate me, one full kiss;
  Keep other hours for others, save me this.
  Yea, and I will not (if it please thee) weep,
  Lest thou be sad; I will but sigh, and sleep.
  Sweet, does death hurt? thou canst not do me wrong:
  I shall not lack thee, as I loved thee, long.
  Hast thou not given me above all that live
  Joy, and a little sorrow shalt not give?
  What even though fairer fingers of strange girls
  Pass nestling through thy beautiful boy's curls
  As mine did, or those curled lithe lips of thine
  Meet theirs as these, all theirs come after mine;
  And though I were not, though I be not, best,
  I have loved and love thee more than all the rest.
  O love, O lover, loose or hold me fast,
  I had thee first, whoever have thee last;
  Fairer or not, what need I know, what care?
  To thy fair bud my blossom once seemed fair.
  Why am I fair at all before thee, why
  At all desired? seeing thou art fair, not I.
  I shall be glad of thee, O fairest head,
  Alive, alone, without thee, with thee, dead;
  I shall remember while the light lives yet,
  And in the night-time I shall not forget.
  Though (as thou wilt) thou leave me ere life leave,
  I will not, for thy love I will not, grieve;
  Not as they use who love not more than I,
  Who love not as I love thee though I die;
  And though thy lips, once mine, be oftener prest
  To many another brow and balmier breast,
  And sweeter arms, or sweeter to thy mind,
  Lull thee or lure, more fond thou wilt not find.




IN MEMORY OF WALTER SAVAGE LANDOR


  Back to the flower-town, side by side,
      The bright months bring,
  New-born, the bridegroom and the bride,
      Freedom and spring.

  The sweet land laughs from sea to sea,
      Filled full of sun;
  All things come back to her, being free;
      All things but one.

  In many a tender wheaten plot
      Flowers that were dead
  Live, and old suns revive; but not
      That holier head.

  By this white wandering waste of sea,
      Far north, I hear
  One face shall never turn to me
      As once this year:

  Shall never smile and turn and rest
      On mine as there,
  Nor one most sacred hand be prest
      Upon my hair.

  I came as one whose thoughts half linger,
      Half run before;
  The youngest to the oldest singer
      That England bore.

  I found him whom I shall not find
      Till all grief end,
  In holiest age our mightiest mind,
      Father and friend.

  But thou, if anything endure,
      If hope there be,
  O spirit that man's life left pure,
      Man's death set free,

  Not with disdain of days that were
      Look earthward now;
  Let dreams revive the reverend hair,
      The imperial brow;

  Come back in sleep, for in the life
      Where thou art not
  We find none like thee. Time and strife
      And the world's lot

  Move thee no more; but love at least
      And reverent heart
  May move thee, royal and released,
      Soul, as thou art.

  And thou, his Florence, to thy trust
      Receive and keep,
  Keep safe his dedicated dust,
      His sacred sleep.

  So shall thy lovers, come from far,
      Mix with thy name
  As morning-star with evening-star
      His faultless fame




A SONG IN TIME OF ORDER. 1852


  Push hard across the sand,
      For the salt wind gathers breath;
  Shoulder and wrist and hand,
      Push hard as the push of death.

  The wind is as iron that rings,
      The foam-heads loosen and flee;
  It swells and welters and swings,
      The pulse of the tide of the sea.

  And up on the yellow cliff
      The long corn flickers and shakes;
  Push, for the wind holds stiff,
      And the gunwale dips and rakes.

  Good hap to the fresh fierce weather,
      The quiver and beat of the sea!
  While three men hold together,
      The kingdoms are less by three.

  Out to the sea with her there,
      Out with her over the sand;
  Let the kings keep the earth for their share!
      We have done with the sharers of land.

  They have tied the world in a tether,
      They have bought over God with a fee;
  While three men hold together,
      The kingdoms are less by three.

  We have done with the kisses that sting,
      The thief's mouth red from the feast,
  The blood on the hands of the king
      And the lie at the lips of the priest.

  Will they tie the winds in a tether,
      Put a bit in the jaws of the sea?
  While three men hold together,
      The kingdoms are less by three.

  Let our flag run out straight in the wind!
      The old red shall be floated again
  When the ranks that are thin shall be thinned,
      When the names that were twenty are ten;

  When the devil's riddle is mastered
      And the galley-bench creaks with a Pope,
  We shall see Buonaparte the bastard
      Kick heels with his throat in a rope.

  While the shepherd sets wolves on his sheep
      And the emperor halters his kine,
  While Shame is a watchman asleep
      And Faith is a keeper of swine,

  Let the wind shake our flag like a feather,
      Like the plumes of the foam of the sea!
  While three men hold together,
      The kingdoms are less by three.

  All the world has its burdens to bear,
      From Cayenne to the Austrian whips;
  Forth, with the rain in our hair
      And the salt sweet foam in our lips;

  In the teeth of the hard glad weather,
      In the blown wet face of the sea;
  While three men hold together,
      The kingdoms are less by three.




A SONG IN TIME OF REVOLUTION. 1860


  The heart of the rulers is sick, and the high-priest covers his head:
  For this is the song of the quick that is heard in the ears of the
      dead.

  The poor and the halt and the blind are keen and mighty and fleet:
  Like the noise of the blowing of wind is the sound of the noise of
      their feet.

  The wind has the sound of a laugh in the clamour of days and of deeds:
  The priests are scattered like chaff, and the rulers broken like
      reeds.

  The high-priest sick from qualms, with his raiment bloodily dashed;
  The thief with branded palms, and the liar with cheeks abashed.

  They are smitten, they tremble greatly, they are pained for their
      pleasant things:
  For the house of the priests made stately, and the might in the mouth
      of the kings.

  They are grieved and greatly afraid; they are taken, they shall not
      flee:
  For the heart of the nations is made as the strength of the springs of
      the sea.

  They were fair in the grace of gold, they walked with delicate feet:
  They were clothed with the cunning of old, and the smell of their
      garments was sweet.

  For the breaking of gold in their hair they halt as a man made lame:
  They are utterly naked and bare; their mouths are bitter with shame.

  Wilt thou judge thy people now, O king that wast found most wise?
  Wilt thou lie any more, O thou whose mouth is emptied of lies?

  Shall God make a pact with thee, till his hook be found in thy sides?
  Wilt thou put back the time of the sea, or the place of the season of
      tides?

  Set a word in thy lips, to stand before God with a word in thy mouth:
  That "the rain shall return in the land, and the tender dew after
      drouth."

  But the arm of the elders is broken, their strength is unbound and
      undone:
  They wait for a sign of a token; they cry, and there cometh none.

  Their moan is in every place, the cry of them filleth the land:
  There is shame in the sight of their face, there is fear in the thews
      of their hand.

  They are girdled about the reins with a curse for the girdle thereon:
  For the noise of the rending of chains the face of their colour is
      gone.

  For the sound of the shouting of men they are grievously stricken at
      heart:
  They are smitten asunder with pain, their bones are smitten apart.

  There is none of them all that is whole; their lips gape open for
      breath;
  They are clothed with sickness of soul, and the shape of the shadow of
      death.

  The wind is thwart in their feet; it is full of the shouting of mirth;
  As one shaketh the sides of a sheet, so it shaketh the ends of the
      earth.

  The sword, the sword is made keen; the iron has opened its mouth;
  The corn is red that was green; it is bound for the sheaves of the
      south.

  The sound of a word was shed, the sound of the wind as a breath,
  In the ears of the souls that were dead, in the dust of the deepness
      of death;

  Where the face of the moon is taken, the ways of the stars undone,
  The light of the whole sky shaken, the light of the face of the sun:

  Where the waters are emptied and broken, the waves of the waters are
      stayed;
  Where God has bound for a token the darkness that maketh afraid;

  Where the sword was covered and hidden, and dust had grown in its
      side,
  A word came forth which was bidden, the crying of one that cried:

  The sides of the two-edged sword shall be bare, and its mouth shall be
      red,
  For the breath of the face of the Lord that is felt in the bones of
      the dead.




TO VICTOR HUGO


    In the fair days when God
    By man as godlike trod,
  And each alike was Greek, alike was free,
    God's lightning spared, they said,
    Alone the happier head
  Whose laurels screened it; fruitless grace for thee,
    To whom the high gods gave of right
  Their thunders and their laurels and their light.

    Sunbeams and bays before
    Our master's servants wore,
  For these Apollo left in all men's lands;
    But far from these ere now
    And watched with jealous brow
  Lay the blind lightnings shut between God's hands,
    And only loosed on slaves and kings
  The terror of the tempest of their wings.

    Born in those younger years
    That shone with storms of spears
  And shook in the wind blown from a dead world's pyre,
    When by her back-blown hair
    Napoleon caught the fair
  And fierce Republic with her feet of fire,
    And stayed with iron words and hands
  Her flight, and freedom in a thousand lands:

    Thou sawest the tides of things
    Close over heads of kings,
  And thine hand felt the thunder, and to thee
    Laurels and lightnings were
    As sunbeams and soft air
  Mixed each in other, or as mist with sea
    Mixed, or as memory with desire,
  Or the lute's pulses with the louder lyre.

    For thee man's spirit stood
    Disrobed of flesh and blood,
  And bare the heart of the most secret hours;
    And to thine hand more tame
    Than birds in winter came
  High hopes and unknown flying forms of powers,
    And from thy table fed, and sang
  Till with the tune men's ears took fire and rang.

    Even all men's eyes and ears
    With fiery sound and tears
  Waxed hot, and cheeks caught flame and eyelid light,
    At those high songs of thine
    That stung the sense like wine,
  Or fell more soft than dew or snow by night,
    Or wailed as in some flooded cave
  Sobs the strong broken spirit of a wave.

    But we, our master, we
    Whose hearts, uplift to thee,
  Ache with the pulse of thy remembered song,
    We ask not nor await
    From the clenched hands of fate,
  As thou, remission of the world's old wrong;
    Respite we ask not, nor release;
  Freedom a man may have, he shall not peace.

    Though thy most fiery hope
    Storm heaven, to set wide ope
  The all-sought-for gate whence God or Chance debars
    All feet of men, all eyes--
    The old night resumes her skies,
  Her hollow hiding-place of clouds and stars,
    Where nought save these is sure in sight;
  And, paven with death, our days are roofed with night.

    One thing we can; to be
    Awhile, as men may, free;
  But not by hope or pleasure the most stern
    Goddess, most awful-eyed,
    Sits, but on either side
  Sit sorrow and the wrath of hearts that burn,
    Sad faith that cannot hope or fear,
  And memory grey with many a flowerless year.

    Not that in stranger's wise
    I lift not loving eyes
  To the fair foster-mother France, that gave
    Beyond the pale fleet foam
    Help to my sires and home,
  Whose great sweet breast could shelter those and save
    Whom from her nursing breasts and hands
  Their land cast forth of old on gentler lands.

    Not without thoughts that ache
    For theirs and for thy sake,
  I, born of exiles, hail thy banished head;
    I whose young song took flight
    Toward the great heat and light
  On me a child from thy far splendour shed,
    From thine high place of soul and song,
  Which, fallen on eyes yet feeble, made them strong.

    Ah, not with lessening love
    For memories born hereof,
  I look to that sweet mother-land, and see
    The old fields and fair full streams,
    And skies, but fled like dreams
  The feet of freedom and the thought of thee;
    And all between the skies and graves
  The mirth of mockers and the shame of slaves.

    She, killed with noisome air,
    Even she! and still so fair,
  Who said "Let there be freedom," and there was
    Freedom; and as a lance
    The fiery eyes of France
  Touched the world's sleep and as a sleep made pass
    Forth of men's heavier ears and eyes
  Smitten with fire and thunder from new skies.

    Are they men's friends indeed
    Who watch them weep and bleed?
  Because thou hast loved us, shall the gods love thee?
    Thou, first of men and friend,
    Seest thou, even thou, the end?
  Thou knowest what hath been, knowest thou what shall be?
    Evils may pass and hopes endure;
  But fate is dim, and all the gods obscure.

    O nursed in airs apart,
    O poet highest of heart,
  Hast thou seen time, who hast seen so many things?
    Are not the years more wise,
    More sad than keenest eyes,
  The years with soundless feet and sounding wings?
    Passing we hear them not, but past
  The clamour of them thrills us, and their blast.

    Thou art chief of us, and lord;
    Thy song is as a sword
  Keen-edged and scented in the blade from flowers;
    Thou art lord and king; but we
    Lift younger eyes, and see
  Less of high hope, less light on wandering hours;
    Hours that have borne men down so long,
  Seen the right fail, and watched uplift the wrong.

    But thine imperial soul,
    As years and ruins roll
  To the same end, and all things and all dreams
    With the same wreck and roar
    Drift on the dim same shore,
  Still in the bitter foam and brackish streams
    Tracks the fresh water-spring to be
  And sudden sweeter fountains in the sea.

    As once the high God bound
    With many a rivet round
  Man's saviour, and with iron nailed him through,
    At the wild end of things,
    Where even his own bird's wings
  Flagged, whence the sea shone like a drop of dew,
    From Caucasus beheld below
  Past fathoms of unfathomable snow;

    So the strong God, the chance
    Central of circumstance,
  Still shows him exile who will not be slave;
    All thy great fame and thee
    Girt by the dim strait sea
  With multitudinous walls of wandering wave;
    Shows us our greatest from his throne
  Fate-stricken, and rejected of his own.

    Yea, he is strong, thou say'st,
    A mystery many-faced,
  The wild beasts know him and the wild birds flee;
    The blind night sees him, death
    Shrinks beaten at his breath,
  And his right hand is heavy on the sea:
    We know he hath made us, and is king;
  We know not if he care for anything.

    Thus much, no more, we know;
    He bade what is be so,
  Bade light be and bade night be, one by one;
    Bade hope and fear, bade ill
    And good redeem and kill,
  Till all men be aweary of the sun
    And his world burn in its own flame
  And bear no witness longer of his name.

    Yet though all this be thus,
    Be those men praised of us
  Who have loved and wrought and sorrowed and not sinned
    For fame or fear or gold,
    Nor waxed for winter cold,
  Nor changed for changes of the worldly wind;
    Praised above men of men be these,
  Till this one world and work we know shall cease.

    Yea, one thing more than this,
    We know that one thing is,
  The splendour of a spirit without blame,
    That not the labouring years
    Blind-born, nor any fears,
  Nor men nor any gods can tire or tame;
    But purer power with fiery breath
  Fills, and exalts above the gulfs of death.

    Praised above men be thou,
    Whose laurel-laden brow,
  Made for the morning, droops not in the night;
    Praised and beloved, that none
    Of all thy great things done
  Flies higher than thy most equal spirit's flight;
    Praised, that nor doubt nor hope could bend
  Earth's loftiest head, found upright to the end.




BEFORE DAWN


  Sweet life, if life were stronger,
  Earth clear of years that wrong her,
  Then two things might live longer,
    Two sweeter things than they;
  Delight, the rootless flower,
  And love, the bloomless bower;
  Delight that lives an hour,
    And love that lives a day.

  From evensong to daytime,
  When April melts in Maytime,
  Love lengthens out his playtime,
    Love lessens breath by breath,
  And kiss by kiss grows older
  On listless throat or shoulder
  Turned sideways now, turned colder
    Than life that dreams of death.

  This one thing once worth giving
  Life gave, and seemed worth living;
  Sin sweet beyond forgiving
    And brief beyond regret:
  To laugh and love together
  And weave with foam and feather
  And wind and words the tether
    Our memories play with yet.

  Ah, one thing worth beginning,
  One thread in life worth spinning,
  Ah sweet, one sin worth sinning
    With all the whole soul's will;
  To lull you till one stilled you,
  To kiss you till one killed you,
  To feed you till one filled you,
    Sweet lips, if love could fill;

  To hunt sweet Love and lose him
  Between white arms and bosom,
  Between the bud and blossom,
    Between your throat and chin;
  To say of shame--what is it?
  Of virtue--we can miss it,
  Of sin--we can but kiss it,
    And it's no longer sin:

  To feel the strong soul, stricken
  Through fleshly pulses, quicken
  Beneath swift sighs that thicken,
    Soft hands and lips that smite;
  Lips that no love can tire,
  With hands that sting like fire,
  Weaving the web Desire
    To snare the bird Delight.

  But love so lightly plighted,
  Our love with torch unlighted,
  Paused near us unaffrighted,
    Who found and left him free;
  None, seeing us cloven in sunder,
  Will weep or laugh or wonder;
  Light love stands clear of thunder,
    And safe from winds at sea.

  As, when late larks give warning
  Of dying lights and dawning,
  Night murmurs to the morning,
    "Lie still, O love, lie still;"
  And half her dark limbs cover
  The white limbs of her lover,
  With amorous plumes that hover
    And fervent lips that chill;

  As scornful day represses
  Night's void and vain caresses,
  And from her cloudier tresses
    Unwinds the gold of his,
  With limbs from limbs dividing
  And breath by breath subsiding;
  For love has no abiding,
    But dies before the kiss;

  So hath it been, so be it;
  For who shall live and flee it?
  But look that no man see it
    Or hear it unaware;
  Lest all who love and choose him
  See Love, and so refuse him;
  For all who find him lose him,
    But all have found him fair.




DOLORES

(NOTRE-DAME DES SEPT DOULEURS)


  Cold eyelids that hide like a jewel
    Hard eyes that grow soft for an hour;
  The heavy white limbs, and the cruel
    Red mouth like a venomous flower;
  When these are gone by with their glories,
    What shall rest of thee then, what remain,
  O mystic and sombre Dolores,
    Our Lady of Pain?

  Seven sorrows the priests give their Virgin;
    But thy sins, which are seventy times seven,
  Seven ages would fail thee to purge in,
    And then they would haunt thee in heaven:
  Fierce midnights and famishing morrows,
    And the loves that complete and control
  All the joys of the flesh, all the sorrows
    That wear out the soul.

  O garment not golden but gilded,
    O garden where all men may dwell,
  O tower not of ivory, but builded
    By hands that reach heaven from hell;
  O mystical rose of the mire,
    O house not of gold but of gain,
  O house of unquenchable fire,
    Our Lady of Pain!

  O lips full of lust and of laughter,
    Curled snakes that are fed from my breast,
  Bite hard, lest remembrance come after
    And press with new lips where you pressed.
  For my heart too springs up at the pressure,
    Mine eyelids too moisten and burn;
  Ah, feed me and fill me with pleasure,
    Ere pain come in turn.

  In yesterday's reach and to-morrow's,
    Out of sight though they lie of to-day,
  There have been and there yet shall be sorrows
    That smite not and bite not in play.
  The life and the love thou despisest,
    These hurt us indeed, and in vain,
  O wise among women, and wisest,
    Our Lady of Pain.

  Who gave thee thy wisdom? what stories
    That stung thee, what visions that smote?
  Wert thou pure and a maiden, Dolores,
    When desire took thee first by the throat?
  What bud was the shell of a blossom
    That all men may smell to and pluck?
  What milk fed thee first at what bosom?
    What sins gave thee suck?

  We shift and bedeck and bedrape us,
    Thou art noble and nude and antique;
  Libitina thy mother, Priapus
    Thy father, a Tuscan and Greek.
  We play with light loves in the portal,
    And wince and relent and refrain;
  Loves die, and we know thee immortal,
    Our Lady of Pain.

  Fruits fail and love dies and time ranges;
    Thou art fed with perpetual breath,
  And alive after infinite changes,
    And fresh from the kisses of death;
  Of languors rekindled and rallied,
    Of barren delights and unclean,
  Things monstrous and fruitless, a pallid
    And poisonous queen.

  Could you hurt me, sweet lips, though I hurt you?
    Men touch them, and change in a trice
  The lilies and languors of virtue
    For the raptures and roses of vice;
  Those lie where thy foot on the floor is,
    These crown and caress thee and chain,
  O splendid and sterile Dolores,
    Our Lady of Pain.

  There are sins it may be to discover,
    There are deeds it may be to delight.
  What new work wilt thou find for thy lover,
    What new passions for daytime or night?
  What spells that they know not a word of
    Whose lives are as leaves overblown?
  What tortures undreamt of, unheard of,
    Unwritten, unknown?

  Ah beautiful passionate body
    That never has ached with a heart!
  On thy mouth though the kisses are bloody,
    Though they sting till it shudder and smart,
  More kind than the love we adore is,
    They hurt not the heart or the brain,
  O bitter and tender Dolores,
    Our Lady of Pain.

  As our kisses relax and redouble,
    From the lips and the foam and the fangs
  Shall no new sin be born for men's trouble,
    No dream of impossible pangs?
  With the sweet of the sins of old ages
    Wilt thou satiate thy soul as of yore?
  Too sweet is the rind, say the sages,
    Too bitter the core.

  Hast thou told all thy secrets the last time,
    And bared all thy beauties to one?
  Ah, where shall we go then for pastime,
    If the worst that can be has been done?
  But sweet as the rind was the core is;
    We are fain of thee still, we are fain,
  O sanguine and subtle Dolores,
    Our Lady of Pain.

  By the hunger of change and emotion,
    By the thirst of unbearable things,
  By despair, the twin-born of devotion,
    By the pleasure that winces and stings,
  The delight that consumes the desire,
    The desire that outruns the delight,
  By the cruelty deaf as a fire
    And blind as the night,

  By the ravenous teeth that have smitten
    Through the kisses that blossom and bud,
  By the lips intertwisted and bitten
    Till the foam has a savour of blood,
  By the pulse as it rises and falters,
    By the hands as they slacken and strain,
  I adjure thee, respond from thine altars,
    Our Lady of Pain.

  Wilt thou smile as a woman disdaining
    The light fire in the veins of a boy?
  But he comes to thee sad, without feigning,
    Who has wearied of sorrow and joy;
  Less careful of labour and glory
    Than the elders whose hair has uncurled;
  And young, but with fancies as hoary
    And grey as the world.

  I have passed from the outermost portal
    To the shrine where a sin is a prayer;
  What care though the service be mortal?
    O our Lady of Torture, what care?
  All thine the last wine that I pour is,
    The last in the chalice we drain,
  O fierce and luxurious Dolores,
    Our Lady of Pain.

  All thine the new wine of desire,
    The fruit of four lips as they clung
  Till the hair and the eyelids took fire,
    The foam of a serpentine tongue,
  The froth of the serpents of pleasure,
    More salt than the foam of the sea,
  Now felt as a flame, now at leisure
    As wine shed for me.

  Ah thy people, thy children, thy chosen,
    Marked cross from the womb and perverse!
  They have found out the secret to cozen
    The gods that constrain us and curse;
  They alone, they are wise, and none other;
    Give me place, even me, in their train,
  O my sister, my spouse, and my mother,
    Our Lady of Pain.

  For the crown of our life as it closes
    Is darkness, the fruit thereof dust;
  No thorns go as deep as a rose's,
    And love is more cruel than lust.
  Time turns the old days to derision,
    Our loves into corpses or wives;
  And marriage and death and division
    Make barren our lives.

  And pale from the past we draw nigh thee,
    And satiate with comfortless hours;
  And we know thee, how all men belie thee,
    And we gather the fruit of thy flowers;
  The passion that slays and recovers,
    The pangs and the kisses that rain
  On the lips and the limbs of thy lovers,
    Our Lady of Pain.

  The desire of thy furious embraces
    Is more than the wisdom of years,
  On the blossom though blood lie in traces,
    Though the foliage be sodden with tears.
  For the lords in whose keeping the door is
    That opens on all who draw breath
  Gave the cypress to love, my Dolores,
    The myrtle to death.

  And they laughed, changing hands in the measure,
    And they mixed and made peace after strife;
  Pain melted in tears, and was pleasure;
    Death tingled with blood, and was life.
  Like lovers they melted and tingled,
    In the dusk of thine innermost fane;
  In the darkness they murmured and mingled,
    Our Lady of Pain.

  In a twilight where virtues are vices,
    In thy chapels, unknown of the sun,
  To a tune that enthralls and entices,
    They were wed, and the twain were as one.
  For the tune from thine altar hath sounded
    Since God bade the world's work begin,
  And the fume of thine incense abounded,
    To sweeten the sin.

  Love listens, and paler than ashes,
    Through his curls as the crown on them slips,
  Lifts languid wet eyelids and lashes,
    And laughs with insatiable lips.
  Thou shalt hush him with heavy caresses,
    With music that scares the profane;
  Thou shalt darken his eyes with thy tresses,
    Our Lady of Pain.

  Thou shalt blind his bright eyes though he wrestle,
    Thou shalt chain his light limbs though he strive;
  In his lips all thy serpents shall nestle,
    In his hands all thy cruelties thrive.
  In the daytime thy voice shall go through him,
    In his dreams he shall feel thee and ache;
  Thou shalt kindle by night and subdue him
    Asleep and awake.

  Thou shalt touch and make redder his roses
    With juice not of fruit nor of bud;
  When the sense in the spirit reposes,
    Thou shalt quicken the soul through the blood.
  Thine, thine the one grace we implore is,
    Who would live and not languish or feign,
  O sleepless and deadly Dolores,
    Our Lady of Pain.

  Dost thou dream, in a respite of slumber,
    In a lull of the fires of thy life,
  Of the days without name, without number,
    When thy will stung the world into strife;
  When, a goddess, the pulse of thy passion
    Smote kings as they revelled in Rome;
  And they hailed thee re-risen, O Thalassian,
    Foam-white, from the foam?

  When thy lips had such lovers to flatter;
    When the city lay red from thy rods,
  And thine hands were as arrows to scatter
    The children of change and their gods;
  When the blood of thy foemen made fervent
    A sand never moist from the main,
  As one smote them, their lord and thy servant,
    Our Lady of Pain.

  On sands by the storm never shaken,
    Nor wet from the washing of tides;
  Nor by foam of the waves overtaken,
    Nor winds that the thunder bestrides;
  But red from the print of thy paces,
    Made smooth for the world and its lords,
  Ringed round with a flame of fair faces,
    And splendid with swords.

  There the gladiator, pale for thy pleasure,
    Drew bitter and perilous breath;
  There torments laid hold on the treasure
    Of limbs too delicious for death;
  When thy gardens were lit with live torches;
    When the world was a steed for thy rein;
  When the nations lay prone in thy porches,
    Our Lady of Pain.

  When, with flame all around him aspirant,
    Stood flushed, as a harp-player stands,
  The implacable beautiful tyrant,
    Rose-crowned, having death in his hands;
  And a sound as the sound of loud water
    Smote far through the flight of the fires,
  And mixed with the lightning of slaughter
   A thunder of lyres.

  Dost thou dream of what was and no more is,
    The old kingdoms of earth and the kings?
  Dost thou hunger for these things, Dolores,
    For these, in a world of new things?
  But thy bosom no fasts could emaciate,
    No hunger compel to complain
  Those lips that no bloodshed could satiate,
    Our Lady of Pain.

  As of old when the world's heart was lighter,
    Through thy garments the grace of thee glows,
  The white wealth of thy body made whiter
    By the blushes of amorous blows,
  And seamed with sharp lips and fierce fingers,
    And branded by kisses that bruise;
  When all shall be gone that now lingers,
    Ah, what shall we lose?

  Thou wert fair in the fearless old fashion,
    And thy limbs are as melodies yet,
  And move to the music of passion
    With lithe and lascivious regret.
  What ailed us, O gods, to desert you
    For creeds that refuse and restrain?
  Come down and redeem us from virtue,
    Our Lady of Pain.

  All shrines that were Vestal are flameless,
    But the flame has not fallen from this;
  Though obscure be the god, and though nameless
    The eyes and the hair that we kiss;
  Low fires that love sits by and forges
    Fresh heads for his arrows and thine;
  Hair loosened and soiled in mid orgies
    With kisses and wine.

  Thy skin changes country and colour,
    And shrivels or swells to a snake's.
  Let it brighten and bloat and grow duller,
    We know it, the flames and the flakes,
  Red brands on it smitten and bitten,
    Round skies where a star is a stain,
  And the leaves with thy litanies written,
    Our Lady of Pain.

  On thy bosom though many a kiss be,
    There are none such as knew it of old.
  Was it Alciphron once or Arisbe,
    Male ringlets or feminine gold,
  That thy lips met with under the statue,
    Whence a look shot out sharp after thieves
  From the eyes of the garden-god at you
    Across the fig-leaves?

  Then still, through dry seasons and moister,
    One god had a wreath to his shrine;
  Then love was the pearl of his oyster,[4]
    And Venus rose red out of wine.
  We have all done amiss, choosing rather
    Such loves as the wise gods disdain;
  Intercede for us thou with thy father,
    Our Lady of Pain.

  In spring he had crowns of his garden,
    Red corn in the heat of the year,
  Then hoary green olives that harden
    When the grape-blossom freezes with fear;
  And milk-budded myrtles with Venus
    And vine-leaves with Bacchus he trod;
  And ye said, "We have seen, he hath seen us,
    A visible God."

  What broke off the garlands that girt you?
    What sundered you spirit and clay?
  Weak sins yet alive are as virtue
    To the strength of the sins of that day.
  For dried is the blood of thy lover,
    Ipsithilla, contracted the vein;
  Cry aloud, "Will he rise and recover,
    Our Lady of Pain?"

  Cry aloud; for the old world is broken:
    Cry out; for the Phrygian is priest,
  And rears not the bountiful token
    And spreads not the fatherly feast.
  From the midmost of Ida, from shady
    Recesses that murmur at morn,
  They have brought and baptized her, Our Lady,
    A goddess new-born.

  And the chaplets of old are above us,
    And the oyster-bed teems out of reach;
  Old poets outsing and outlove us,
    And Catullus makes mouths at our speech.
  Who shall kiss, in thy father's own city,
    With such lips as he sang with, again?
  Intercede for us all of thy pity,
    Our Lady of Pain.

  Out of Dindymus heavily laden
    Her lions draw bound and unfed
  A mother, a mortal, a maiden,
    A queen over death and the dead.
  She is cold, and her habit is lowly,
    Her temple of branches and sods;
  Most fruitful and virginal, holy,
    A mother of gods.

  She hath wasted with fire thine high places,
    She hath hidden and marred and made sad
  The fair limbs of the Loves, the fair faces
    Of gods that were goodly and glad.
  She slays, and her hands are not bloody;
    She moves as a moon in the wane,
  White-robed, and thy raiment is ruddy,
    Our Lady of Pain.

  They shall pass and their places be taken,
    The gods and the priests that are pure.
  They shall pass, and shalt thou not be shaken?
    They shall perish, and shalt thou endure?
  Death laughs, breathing close and relentless
    In the nostrils and eyelids of lust,
  With a pinch in his fingers of scentless
    And delicate dust.

  But the worm shall revive thee with kisses;
    Thou shalt change and transmute as a god,
  As the rod to a serpent that hisses,
    As the serpent again to a rod.
  Thy life shall not cease though thou doff it;
    Thou shalt live until evil be slain,
  And good shall die first, said thy prophet,
    Our Lady of Pain.

  Did he lie? did he laugh? does he know it,
    Now he lies out of reach, out of breath,
  Thy prophet, thy preacher, thy poet,
    Sin's child by incestuous Death?
  Did he find out in fire at his waking,
    Or discern as his eyelids lost light,
  When the bands of the body were breaking
    And all came in sight?

  Who has known all the evil before us,
    Or the tyrannous secrets of time?
  Though we match not the dead men that bore us
    At a song, at a kiss, at a crime--
  Though the heathen outface and outlive us,
    And our lives and our longings are twain--
  Ah, forgive us our virtues, forgive us,
    Our Lady of Pain.

  Who are we that embalm and embrace thee
    With spices and savours of song?
  What is time, that his children should face thee?
    What am I, that my lips do thee wrong?
  I could hurt thee--but pain would delight thee;
    Or caress thee--but love would repel;
  And the lovers whose lips would excite thee
    Are serpents in hell.

  Who now shall content thee as they did,
    Thy lovers, when temples were built
  And the hair of the sacrifice braided
    And the blood of the sacrifice spilt,
  In Lampsacus fervent with faces,
    In Aphaca red from thy reign,
  Who embraced thee with awful embraces,
    Our Lady of Pain?

  Where are they, Cotytto or Venus,
    Astarte or Ashtaroth, where?
  Do their hands as we touch come between us?
    Is the breath of them hot in thy hair?
  From their lips have thy lips taken fever,
    With the blood of their bodies grown red?
  Hast thou left upon earth a believer
    If these men are dead?

  They were purple of raiment and golden,
    Filled full of thee, fiery with wine,
  Thy lovers, in haunts unbeholden,
    In marvellous chambers of thine.
  They are fled, and their footprints escape us,
    Who appraise thee, adore, and abstain,
  O daughter of Death and Priapus,
    Our Lady of Pain.

  What ails us to fear overmeasure,
    To praise thee with timorous breath,
  O mistress and mother of pleasure,
    The one thing as certain as death?
  We shall change as the things that we cherish,
    Shall fade as they faded before,
  As foam upon water shall perish,
    As sand upon shore.

  We shall know what the darkness discovers,
    If the grave-pit be shallow or deep;
  And our fathers of old, and our lovers,
    We shall know if they sleep not or sleep.
  We shall see whether hell be not heaven,
    Find out whether tares be not grain,
  And the joys of thee seventy times seven,
    Our Lady of Pain.

    [4] Nam te præcipuè in suis urbibus colit ora
        Hellespontia, cæteris ostreosior oris.
                                      CATULL. _Carm._ xviii.




THE GARDEN OF PROSERPINE


  Here, where the world is quiet;
    Here, where all trouble seems
  Dead winds' and spent waves' riot
    In doubtful dreams of dreams;
  I watch the green field growing
    For reaping folk and sowing,
  For harvest-time and mowing,
    A sleepy world of streams.

  I am tired of tears and laughter,
    And men that laugh and weep;
  Of what may come hereafter
    For men that sow to reap:
  I am weary of days and hours,
    Blown buds of barren flowers,
  Desires and dreams and powers
    And everything but sleep.

  Here life has death for neighbour,
    And far from eye or ear
  Wan waves and wet winds labour,
    Weak ships and spirits steer;
  They drive adrift, and whither
    They wot not who make thither;
  But no such winds blow hither,
    And no such things grow here.

  No growth of moor or coppice,
    No heather-flower or vine,
  But bloomless buds of poppies,
    Green grapes of Proserpine,
  Pale beds of blowing rushes
  Where no leaf blooms or blushes
  Save this whereout she crushes
    For dead men deadly wine.

  Pale, without name or number,
    In fruitless fields of corn,
  They bow themselves and slumber
    All night till light is born;
  And like a soul belated,
  In hell and heaven unmated,
  By cloud and mist abated
    Comes out of darkness morn.

  Though one were strong as seven,
    He too with death shall dwell,
  Nor wake with wings in heaven,
    Nor weep for pains in hell;
  Though one were fair as roses,
  His beauty clouds and closes;
  And well though love reposes,
    In the end it is not well.

  Pale, beyond porch and portal,
    Crowned with calm leaves, she stands
  Who gathers all things mortal
    With cold immortal hands;
  Her languid lips are sweeter
  Than love's who fears to greet her
  To men that mix and meet her
    From many times and lands.

  She waits for each and other,
    She waits for all men born;
  Forgets the earth her mother,
    The life of fruits and corn;
  And spring and seed and swallow
  Take wing for her and follow
  Where summer song rings hollow
    And flowers are put to scorn.

  There go the loves that wither,
    The old loves with wearier wings;
  And all dead years draw thither,
    And all disastrous things;
  Dead dreams of days forsaken,
  Blind buds that snows have shaken,
  Wild leaves that winds have taken,
    Red strays of ruined springs.

  We are not sure of sorrow,
    And joy was never sure;
  To-day will die to-morrow;
    Time stoops to no man's lure;
  And love, grown faint and fretful,
  With lips but half regretful
  Sighs, and with eyes forgetful
    Weeps that no loves endure.

  From too much love of living,
    From hope and fear set free,
  We thank with brief thanksgiving
    Whatever gods may be
  That no life lives for ever;
  That dead men rise up never;
  That even the weariest river
    Winds somewhere safe to sea.

  Then star nor sun shall waken,
    Nor any change of light:
  Nor sound of waters shaken,
    Nor any sound or sight:
  Nor wintry leaves nor vernal,
  Nor days nor things diurnal;
  Only the sleep eternal
    In an eternal night.




HESPERIA


  Out of the golden remote wild west where the sea without shore is,
    Full of the sunset, and sad, if at all, with the fulness of joy,
  As a wind sets in with the autumn that blows from the region of
        stories,
    Blows with a perfume of songs and of memories beloved from a boy,
  Blows from the capes of the past oversea to the bays of the present,
    Filled as with shadow of sound with the pulse of invisible feet,
  Far out to the shallows and straits of the future, by rough ways or
        pleasant,
    Is it thither the wind's wings beat? is it hither to me, O my sweet?
  For thee, in the stream of the deep tide-wind blowing in with the
        water,
    Thee I behold as a bird borne in with the wind from the west,
  Straight from the sunset, across white waves whence rose as a daughter
    Venus thy mother, in years when the world was a water at rest.
  Out of the distance of dreams, as a dream that abides after slumber,
    Strayed from the fugitive flock of the night, when the moon overhead
  Wanes in the wan waste heights of the heaven, and stars without number
    Die without sound, and are spent like lamps that are burnt by the
        dead,
  Comes back to me, stays by me, lulls me with touch of forgotten
        caresses,
    One warm dream clad about with a fire as of life that endures;
  The delight of thy face, and the sound of thy feet, and the wind of
        thy tresses,
    And all of a man that regrets, and all of a maid that allures.
  But thy bosom is warm for my face and profound as a manifold flower,
    Thy silence as music, thy voice as an odour that fades in a flame;
  Not a dream, not a dream is the kiss of thy mouth, and the bountiful
        hour
    That makes me forget what was sin, and would make me forget were it
        shame.
  Thine eyes that are quiet, thine hands that are tender, thy lips that
        are loving,
    Comfort and cool me as dew in the dawn of a moon like a dream;
  And my heart yearns baffled and blind, moved vainly toward thee, and
        moving
    As the refluent seaweed moves in the languid exuberant stream,
  Fair as a rose is on earth, as a rose under water in prison,
    That stretches and swings to the slow passionate pulse of the sea,
  Closed up from the air and the sun, but alive, as a ghost rearisen,
    Pale as the love that revives as a ghost rearisen in me.
  From the bountiful infinite west, from the happy memorial places
    Full of the stately repose and the lordly delight of the dead,
  Where the fortunate islands are lit with the light of ineffable faces,
    And the sound of a sea without wind is about them, and sunset is
        red,
  Come back to redeem and release me from love that recalls and
        represses,
    That cleaves to my flesh as a flame, till the serpent has eaten his
        fill;
  From the bitter delights of the dark, and the feverish, the furtive
        caresses
    That murder the youth in a man or ever his heart have its will.
  Thy lips cannot laugh and thine eyes cannot weep; thou art pale as a
        rose is,
    Paler and sweeter than leaves that cover the blush of the bud;
  And the heart of the flower is compassion, and pity the core it
        encloses,
    Pity, not love, that is born of the breath and decays with the
        blood.
  As the cross that a wild nun clasps till the edge of it bruises her
        bosom,
    So love wounds as we grasp it, and blackens and burns as a flame;
  I have loved overmuch in my life; when the live bud bursts with the
        blossom,
    Bitter as ashes or tears is the fruit, and the wine thereof shame.
  As a heart that its anguish divides is the green bud cloven asunder;
    As the blood of a man self-slain is the flush of the leaves that
        allure;
  And the perfume as poison and wine to the brain, a delight and a
        wonder;
    And the thorns are too sharp for a boy, too slight for a man, to
        endure.
  Too soon did I love it, and lost love's rose; and I cared not for
        glory's:
    Only the blossoms of sleep and of pleasure were mixed in my hair.
  Was it myrtle or poppy thy garland was woven with, O my Dolores?
    Was it pallor of slumber, or blush as of blood, that I found in thee
        fair?
  For desire is a respite from love, and the flesh not the heart is her
        fuel;
    She was sweet to me once, who am fled and escaped from the rage of
        her reign;
  Who behold as of old time at hand as I turn, with her mouth growing
        cruel,
    And flushed as with wine with the blood of her lovers, Our Lady of
        Pain.
  Low down where the thicket is thicker with thorns than with leaves in
        the summer,
    In the brake is a gleaming of eyes and a hissing of tongues that I
        knew;
  And the lithe long throats of her snakes reach round her, their mouths
        overcome her,
    And her lips grow cool with their foam, made moist as a desert with
        dew.
  With the thirst and the hunger of lust though her beautiful lips be so
        bitter,
    With the cold foul foam of the snakes they soften and redden and
        smile;
  And her fierce mouth sweetens, her eyes wax wide and her eyelashes
        glitter,
    And she laughs with a savour of blood in her face, and a savour of
        guile.
  She laughs, and her hands reach hither, her hair blows hither and
        hisses,
    As a low-lit flame in a wind, back-blown till it shudder and leap;
  Let her lips not again lay hold on my soul, nor her poisonous kisses,
    To consume it alive and divide from thy bosom, Our Lady of Sleep.
  Ah daughter of sunset and slumber, if now it return into prison,
    Who shall redeem it anew? but we, if thou wilt, let us fly;
  Let us take to us, now that the white skies thrill with a moon
        unarisen,
    Swift horses of fear or of love, take flight and depart and not die.
  They are swifter than dreams, they are stronger than death; there is
        none that hath ridden,
    None that shall ride in the dim strange ways of his life as we ride;
  By the meadows of memory, the highlands of hope, and the shore that is
        hidden,
    Where life breaks loud and unseen, a sonorous invisible tide;
  By the sands where sorrow has trodden, the salt pools bitter and
        sterile,
    By the thundering reef and the low sea-wall and the channel of
        years,
  Our wild steeds press on the night, strain hard through pleasure and
        peril,
    Labour and listen and pant not or pause for the peril that nears;
  And the sound of them trampling the way cleaves night as an arrow
        asunder,
    And slow by the sand-hill and swift by the down with its glimpses of
        grass,
  Sudden and steady the music, as eight hoofs trample and thunder,
    Rings in the ear of the low blind wind of the night as we pass;
  Shrill shrieks in our faces the blind bland air that was mute as a
        maiden,
    Stung into storm by the speed of our passage, and deaf where we
        past;
  And our spirits too burn as we bound, thine holy but mine heavy-laden,
    As we burn with the fire of our flight; ah love, shall we win at the
        last?




LOVE AT SEA


  We are in love's land to-day;
      Where shall we go?
  Love, shall we start or stay,
      Or sail or row?
  There's many a wind and way,
  And never a May but May;
  We are in love's hand to-day;
      Where shall we go?

  Our landwind is the breath
  Of sorrows kissed to death
      And joys that were;
  Our ballast is a rose;
  Our way lies where God knows
      And love knows where.
            We are in love's hand to-day--

  Our seamen are fledged Loves,
  Our masts are bills of doves,
      Our decks fine gold;
  Our ropes are dead maids' hair,
  Our stores are love-shafts fair
      And manifold.
            We are in love's land to-day--

  Where shall we land you, sweet?
  On fields of strange men's feet,
      Or fields near home?
  Or where the fire-flowers blow,
  Or where the flowers of snow
      Or flowers of foam?
            We are in love's hand to-day--

  Land me, she says, where love
  Shows but one shaft, one dove,
      One heart, one hand.
  --A shore like that, my dear,
  Lies where no man will steer,
      No maiden land.

        _Imitated from Théophile Gautier._




APRIL

FROM THE FRENCH OF THE VIDAME DE CHARTRES

12--?


  When the fields catch flower
    And the underwood is green,
  And from bower unto bower
    The songs of the birds begin,
    I sing with sighing between.
  When I laugh and sing,
    I am heavy at heart for my sin;
  I am sad in the spring
    For my love that I shall not win,
  For a foolish thing.

  This profit I have of my woe,
    That I know, as I sing,
  I know he will needs have it so
    Who is master and king,
    Who is lord of the spirit of spring.
  I will serve her and will not spare
    Till her pity awake
  Who is good, who is pure, who is fair,
    Even her for whose sake
  Love hath ta'en me and slain unaware.

  O my lord, O Love,
    I have laid my life at thy feet;
  Have thy will thereof,
    Do as it please thee with it,
    For what shall please thee is sweet.
  I am come unto thee
    To do thee service, O Love;
  Yet cannot I see
    Thou wilt take any pity thereof,
  Any mercy on me.

  But the grace I have long time sought
    Comes never in sight,
  If in her it abideth not,
    Through thy mercy and might,
    Whose heart is the world's delight.
  Thou hast sworn without fail I shall die,
    For my heart is set
  On what hurts me, I wot not why,
    But cannot forget
  What I love, what I sing for and sigh.

  She is worthy of praise,
    For this grief of her giving is worth
  All the joy of my days
    That lie between death's day and birth,
    All the lordship of things upon earth.
  Nay, what have I said?
    I would not be glad if I could;
  My dream and my dread
    Are of her, and for her sake I would
  That my life were fled.

  Lo, sweet, if I durst not pray to you,
    Then were I dead;
  If I sang not a little to say to you,
    (Could it be said)
    O my love, how my heart would be fed;
  Ah sweet who hast hold of my heart,
    For thy love's sake I live,
  Do but tell me, ere either depart,
    What a lover may give
  For a woman so fair as thou art.


  The lovers that disbelieve,
    False rumours shall grieve
  And evil-speaking shall part.




BEFORE PARTING


  A month or twain to live on honeycomb
  Is pleasant; but one tires of scented time,
  Cold sweet recurrence of accepted rhyme,
  And that strong purple under juice and foam
  Where the wine's heart has burst;
  Nor feel the latter kisses like the first.

  Once yet, this poor one time; I will not pray
  Even to change the bitterness of it,
  The bitter taste ensuing on the sweet,
  To make your tears fall where your soft hair lay
  All blurred and heavy in some perfumed wise
  Over my face and eyes.

  And yet who knows what end the scythèd wheat
  Makes of its foolish poppies' mouths of red?
  These were not sown, these are not harvested,
  They grow a month and are cast under feet
  And none has care thereof,
  As none has care of a divided love.

  I know each shadow of your lips by rote,
  Each change of love in eyelids and eyebrows;
  The fashion of fair temples tremulous
  With tender blood, and colour of your throat;
  I know not how love is gone out of this,
  Seeing that all was his.

  Love's likeness there endures upon all these:
  But out of these one shall not gather love.
  Day hath not strength nor the night shade enough
  To make love whole and fill his lips with ease,
  As some bee-builded cell
  Feels at filled lips the heavy honey swell.

  I know not how this last month leaves your hair
  Less full of purple colour and hid spice,
  And that luxurious trouble of closed eyes
  Is mixed with meaner shadow and waste care;
  And love, kissed out by pleasure, seems not yet
  Worth patience to regret.




THE SUNDEW


  A little marsh-plant, yellow green,
  And pricked at lip with tender red.
  Tread close, and either way you tread
  Some faint black water jets between
  Lest you should bruise the curious head.

  A live thing maybe; who shall know?
  The summer knows and suffers it;
  For the cool moss is thick and sweet
  Each side, and saves the blossom so
  That it lives out the long June heat.

  The deep scent of the heather burns
  About it; breathless though it be,
  Bow down and worship; more than we
  Is the least flower whose life returns,
  Least weed renascent in the sea.

  We are vexed and cumbered in earth's sight
  With wants, with many memories;
  These see their mother what she is,
  Glad-growing, till August leave more bright
  The apple-coloured cranberries.

  Wind blows and bleaches the strong grass,
  Blown all one way to shelter it
  From trample of strayed kine, with feet
  Felt heavier than the moorhen was,
  Strayed up past patches of wild wheat.

  You call it sundew: how it grows,
  If with its colour it have breath,
  If life taste sweet to it, if death
  Pain its soft petal, no man knows:
  Man has no sight or sense that saith.

  My sundew, grown of gentle days,
  In these green miles the spring begun
  Thy growth ere April had half done
  With the soft secret of her ways
  Or June made ready for the sun.

  O red-lipped mouth of marsh-flower,
  I have a secret halved with thee.
  The name that is love's name to me
  Thou knowest, and the face of her
  Who is my festival to see.

  The hard sun, as thy petals knew,
  Coloured the heavy moss-water:
  Thou wert not worth green midsummer
  Nor fit to live to August blue,
  O sundew, not remembering her.




FÉLISE

_Mais où sont les neiges d'antan?_


  What shall be said between us here
    Among the downs, between the trees,
  In fields that knew our feet last year,
    In sight of quiet sands and seas,
    This year, Félise?

  Who knows what word were best to say?
    For last year's leaves lie dead and red
  On this sweet day, in this green May,
    And barren corn makes bitter bread.
    What shall be said?

  Here as last year the fields begin,
    A fire of flowers and glowing grass;
  The old fields we laughed and lingered in,
    Seeing each our souls in last year's glass,
    Félise, alas!

  Shall we not laugh, shall we not weep,
    Not we, though this be as it is?
  For love awake or love asleep
    Ends in a laugh, a dream, a kiss,
    A song like this.

  I that have slept awake, and you
    Sleep, who last year were well awake,
  Though love do all that love can do,
    My heart will never ache or break
    For your heart's sake.

  The great sea, faultless as a flower,
    Throbs, trembling under beam and breeze,
  And laughs with love of the amorous hour.
    I found you fairer once, Félise,
    Than flowers or seas.

  We played at bondsman and at queen;
    But as the days change men change too;
  I find the grey sea's notes of green,
    The green sea's fervent flakes of blue,
    More fair than you.

  Your beauty is not over fair
    Now in mine eyes, who am grown up wise.
  The smell of flowers in all your hair
    Allures not now; no sigh replies
    If your heart sighs.

  But you sigh seldom, you sleep sound,
    You find love's new name good enough.
  Less sweet I find it than I found
    The sweetest name that ever love
    Grew weary of.

  My snake with bright bland eyes, my snake
    Grown tame and glad to be caressed,
  With lips athirst for mine to slake
    Their tender fever! who had guessed
    You loved me best?

  I had died for this last year, to know
    You loved me. Who shall turn on fate?
  I care not if love come or go
    Now, though your love seek mine for mate.
    It is too late.

  The dust of many strange desires
    Lies deep between us; in our eyes
  Dead smoke of perishable fires
    Flickers, a fume in air and skies,
    A steam of sighs.

  You loved me and you loved me not;
    A little, much, and overmuch.
  Will you forget as I forgot?
    Let all dead things lie dead; none such
    Are soft to touch.

  I love you and I do not love,
    Too much, a little, not at all;
  Too much, and never yet enough.
    Birds quick to fledge and fly at call
    Are quick to fall.

  And these love longer now than men,
    And larger loves than ours are these.
  No diver brings up love again
    Dropped once, my beautiful Félise,
    In such cold seas.

  Gone deeper than all plummets sound,
    Where in the dim green dayless day
  The life of such dead things lies bound
    As the sea feeds on, wreck and stray
    And castaway.

  Can I forget? yea, that can I,
    And that can all men; so will you,
  Alive, or later, when you die.
    Ah, but the love you plead was true?
    Was mine not too?

  I loved you for that name of yours
    Long ere we met, and long enough.
  Now that one thing of all endures--
    The sweetest name that ever love
    Waxed weary of.

  Like colours in the sea, like flowers,
    Like a cat's splendid circled eyes
  That wax and wane with love for hours,
    Green as green flame, blue-grey like skies,
    And soft like sighs--

  And all these only like your name,
    And your name full of all of these.
  I say it, and it sounds the same--
    Save that I say it now at ease,
    Your name, Félise.

  I said "she must be swift and white,
    And subtly warm, and half perverse,
  And sweet like sharp soft fruit to bite,
    And like a snake's love lithe and fierce."
    Men have guessed worse.

  What was the song I made of you
    Here where the grass forgets our feet
  As afternoon forgets the dew?
    Ah that such sweet things should be fleet,
    Such fleet things sweet!

  As afternoon forgets the dew,
    As time in time forgets all men,
  As our old place forgets us two,
    Who might have turned to one thing then
    But not again.

          O lips that mine have grown into
            Like April's kissing May,
          O fervent eyelids letting through
          Those eyes the greenest of things blue,
            The bluest of things grey,

          If you were I and I were you,
            How could I love you, say?
          How could the roseleaf love the rue,
          The day love nightfall and her dew,
            Though night may love the day?

  You loved it may be more than I;
    We know not; love is hard to seize.
  And all things are not good to try;
    And lifelong loves the worst of these
    For us, Félise.

  Ah, take the season and have done,
    Love well the hour and let it go:
  Two souls may sleep and wake up one,
    Or dream they wake and find it so,
    And then--you know.

  Kiss me once hard as though a flame
    Lay on my lips and made them fire;
  The same lips now, and not the same;
    What breath shall fill and re-inspire
    A dead desire?

  The old song sounds hollower in mine ear
    Than thin keen sounds of dead men's speech--
  A noise one hears and would not hear;
    Too strong to die, too weak to reach
    From wave to beach.

  We stand on either side the sea,
    Stretch hands, blow kisses, laugh and lean
  I toward you, you toward me;
    But what hears either save the keen
    Grey sea between?

  A year divides us, love from love,
    Though you love now, though I loved then.
  The gulf is strait, but deep enough;
    Who shall recross, who among men
    Shall cross again?

  Love was a jest last year, you said,
    And what lives surely, surely dies.
  Even so; but now that love is dead,
    Shall love rekindle from wet eyes,
    From subtle sighs?

  For many loves are good to see;
    Mutable loves, and loves perverse;
  But there is nothing, nor shall be,
    So sweet, so wicked, but my verse
    Can dream of worse.

  For we that sing and you that love
    Know that which man may, only we.
  The rest live under us; above,
    Live the great gods in heaven, and see
    What things shall be.

  So this thing is and must be so;
    For man dies, and love also dies.
  Though yet love's ghost moves to and fro
    The sea-green mirrors of your eyes,
    And laughs, and lies.

  Eyes coloured like a water-flower,
    And deeper than the green sea's glass;
  Eyes that remember one sweet hour--
    In vain we swore it should not pass;
    In vain, alas!

  Ah my Félise, if love or sin,
    If shame or fear could hold it fast,
  Should we not hold it? Love wears thin,
    And they laugh well who laugh the last.
    Is it not past?

  The gods, the gods are stronger; time
    Falls down before them, all men's knees
  Bow, all men's prayers and sorrows climb
    Like incense towards them; yea, for these
    Are gods, Félise.

  Immortal are they, clothed with powers,
    Not to be comforted at all;
  Lords over all the fruitless hours;
    Too great to appease, too high to appal,
    Too far to call.

  For none shall move the most high gods,
    Who are most sad, being cruel; none
  Shall break or take away the rods
    Wherewith they scourge us, not as one
    That smites a son.

  By many a name of many a creed
    We have called upon them, since the sands
  Fell through time's hour-glass first, a seed
    Of life; and out of many lands
    Have we stretched hands.

  When have they heard us? who hath known
    Their faces, climbed unto their feet,
  Felt them and found them? Laugh or groan,
    Doth heaven remurmur and repeat
    Sad sounds or sweet?

  Do the stars answer? in the night
    Have ye found comfort? or by day
  Have ye seen gods? What hope, what light,
    Falls from the farthest starriest way
    On you that pray?

  Are the skies wet because we weep,
    Or fair because of any mirth?
  Cry out; they are gods; perchance they sleep;
    Cry; thou shalt know what prayers are worth,
    Thou dust and earth.

  O earth, thou art fair; O dust, thou art great;
    O laughing lips and lips that mourn,
  Pray, till ye feel the exceeding weight
    Of God's intolerable scorn,
    Not to be borne.

  Behold, there is no grief like this;
    The barren blossom of thy prayer,
  Thou shalt find out how sweet it is.
    O fools and blind, what seek ye there,
    High up in the air?

  Ye must have gods, the friends of men,
    Merciful gods, compassionate,
  And these shall answer you again.
    Will ye beat always at the gate,
    Ye fools of fate?

  Ye fools and blind; for this is sure,
    That all ye shall not live, but die.
  Lo, what thing have ye found endure?
    Or what thing have ye found on high
    Past the blind sky?

  The ghosts of words and dusty dreams,
    Old memories, faiths infirm and dead.
  Ye fools; for which among you deems
    His prayer can alter green to red
    Or stones to bread?

  Why should ye bear with hopes and fears
    Till all these things be drawn in one,
  The sound of iron-footed years,
    And all the oppression that is done
    Under the sun?

  Ye might end surely, surely pass
    Out of the multitude of things,
  Under the dust, beneath the grass,
    Deep in dim death, where no thought stings,
    No record clings.

  No memory more of love or hate,
    No trouble, nothing that aspires,
  No sleepless labour thwarting fate,
    And thwarted; where no travail tires,
    Where no faith fires.

  All passes, nought that has been is,
    Things good and evil have one end.
  Can anything be otherwise
    Though all men swear all things would mend
    With God to friend?

  Can ye beat off one wave with prayer,
    Can ye move mountains? bid the flower
  Take flight and turn to a bird in the air?
    Can ye hold fast for shine or shower
    One wingless hour?

  Ah sweet, and we too, can we bring
    One sigh back, bid one smile revive?
  Can God restore one ruined thing,
    Or he who slays our souls alive
    Make dead things thrive?

  Two gifts perforce he has given us yet,
    Though sad things stay and glad things fly;
  Two gifts he has given us, to forget
    All glad and sad things that go by,
    And then to die.

  We know not whether death be good,
    But life at least it will not be:
  Men will stand saddening as we stood,
    Watch the same fields and skies as we
    And the same sea.

  Let this be said between us here,
    One love grows green when one turns grey;
  This year knows nothing of last year;
    To-morrow has no more to say
    To yesterday.

  Live and let live, as I will do,
    Love and let love, and so will I.
  But, sweet, for me no more with you:
    Not while I live, not though I die.
    Goodnight, goodbye.




AN INTERLUDE


  In the greenest growth of the Maytime,
    I rode where the woods were wet,
  Between the dawn and the daytime;
    The spring was glad that we met.

  There was something the season wanted,
    Though the ways and the woods smelt sweet;
  The breath at your lips that panted,
  The pulse of the grass at your feet.

  You came, and the sun came after,
    And the green grew golden above;
  And the flag-flowers lightened with laughter,
    And the meadow-sweet shook with love.

  Your feet in the full-grown grasses
    Moved soft as a weak wind blows;
  You passed me as April passes,
    With face made out of a rose.

  By the stream where the stems were slender,
    Your bright foot paused at the sedge;
  It might be to watch the tender
    Light leaves in the springtime hedge,

  On boughs that the sweet month blanches
    With flowery frost of May:
  It might be a bird in the branches,
    It might be a thorn in the way.

  I waited to watch you linger
    With foot drawn back from the dew,
  Till a sunbeam straight like a finger
    Struck sharp through the leaves at you.

  And a bird overhead sang _Follow_,
    And a bird to the right sang _Here_;
  And the arch of the leaves was hollow,
    And the meaning of May was clear.

  I saw where the sun's hand pointed,
    I knew what the bird's note said;
  By the dawn and the dewfall anointed,
    You were queen by the gold on your head.

  As the glimpse of a burnt-out ember
    Recalls a regret of the sun,
  I remember, forget, and remember
    What Love saw done and undone.

  I remember the way we parted,
    The day and the way we met;
  You hoped we were both broken-hearted,
    And knew we should both forget.

  And May with her world in flower
    Seemed still to murmur and smile
  As you murmured and smiled for an hour;
    I saw you turn at the stile.

  A hand like a white wood-blossom
    You lifted, and waved, and passed,
  With head hung down to the bosom,
    And pale, as it seemed, at last.

  And the best and the worst of this is
    That neither is most to blame
  If you've forgotten my kisses
    And I've forgotten your name.




HENDECASYLLABICS


  In the month of the long decline of roses
  I, beholding the summer dead before me,
  Set my face to the sea and journeyed silent,
  Gazing eagerly where above the sea-mark
  Flame as fierce as the fervid eyes of lions
  Half divided the eyelids of the sunset;
  Till I heard as it were a noise of waters
  Moving tremulous under feet of angels
  Multitudinous, out of all the heavens;
  Knew the fluttering wind, the fluttered foliage,
  Shaken fitfully, full of sound and shadow;
  And saw, trodden upon by noiseless angels,
  Long mysterious reaches fed with moonlight,
  Sweet sad straits in a soft subsiding channel,
  Blown about by the lips of winds I knew not,
  Winds not born in the north nor any quarter,
  Winds not warm with the south nor any sunshine;
  Heard between them a voice of exultation,
  "Lo, the summer is dead, the sun is faded,
  Even like as a leaf the year is withered,
  All the fruits of the day from all her branches
  Gathered, neither is any left to gather.
  All the flowers are dead, the tender blossoms,
  All are taken away; the season wasted,
  Like an ember among the fallen ashes.
  Now with light of the winter days, with moonlight,
  Light of snow, and the bitter light of hoarfrost,
  We bring flowers that fade not after autumn,
  Pale white chaplets and crowns of latter seasons,
  Fair false leaves (but the summer leaves were falser),
  Woven under the eyes of stars and planets
  When low light was upon the windy reaches
  Where the flower of foam was blown, a lily
  Dropt among the sonorous fruitless furrows
  And green fields of the sea that make no pasture:
  Since the winter begins, the weeping winter,
  All whose flowers are tears, and round his temples
  Iron blossom of frost is bound for ever."




SAPPHICS


  All the night sleep came not upon my eyelids,
  Shed not dew, nor shook nor unclosed a feather,
  Yet with lips shut close and with eyes of iron
    Stood and beheld me.

  Then to me so lying awake a vision
  Came without sleep over the seas and touched me,
  Softly touched mine eyelids and lips; and I too,
    Full of the vision,

  Saw the white implacable Aphrodite,
  Saw the hair unbound and the feet unsandalled
  Shine as fire of sunset on western waters;
    Saw the reluctant

  Feet, the straining plumes of the doves that drew her,
  Looking always, looking with necks reverted,
  Back to Lesbos, back to the hills whereunder
    Shone Mitylene;

  Heard the flying feet of the Loves behind her
  Make a sudden thunder upon the waters,
  As the thunder flung from the strong unclosing
    Wings of a great wind.

  So the goddess fled from her place, with awful
  Sound of feet and thunder of wings around her;
  While behind a clamour of singing women
    Severed the twilight.

  Ah the singing, ah the delight, the passion!
  All the Loves wept, listening; sick with anguish,
  Stood the crowned nine Muses about Apollo;
    Fear was upon them,

  While the tenth sang wonderful things they knew not.
  Ah the tenth, the Lesbian! the nine were silent,
  None endured the sound of her song for weeping;
    Laurel by laurel,

  Faded all their crowns; but about her forehead,
  Round her woven tresses and ashen temples
  White as dead snow, paler than grass in summer,
    Ravaged with kisses,

  Shone a light of fire as a crown for ever.
  Yea, almost the implacable Aphrodite
  Paused, and almost wept; such a song was that song.
    Yea, by her name too

  Called her, saying, "Turn to me, O my Sappho;"
  Yet she turned her face from the Loves, she saw not
  Tears for laughter darken immortal eyelids,
    Heard not about her

  Fearful fitful wings of the doves departing,
  Saw not how the bosom of Aphrodite
  Shook with weeping, saw not her shaken raiment,
    Saw not her hands wrung;

  Saw the Lesbians kissing across their smitten
  Lutes with lips more sweet than the sound of lute-strings,
  Mouth to mouth and hand upon hand, her chosen,
    Fairer than all men;

  Only saw the beautiful lips and fingers,
  Full of songs and kisses and little whispers,
  Full of music; only beheld among them
    Soar, as a bird soars

  Newly fledged, her visible song, a marvel,
  Made of perfect sound and exceeding passion,
  Sweetly shapen, terrible, full of thunders,
    Clothed with the wind's wings.

  Then rejoiced she, laughing with love, and scattered
  Roses, awful roses of holy blossom;
  Then the Loves thronged sadly with hidden faces
    Round Aphrodite,

  Then the Muses, stricken at heart, were silent;
  Yea, the gods waxed pale; such a song was that song.
  All reluctant, all with a fresh repulsion,
    Fled from before her.

  All withdrew long since, and the land was barren,
  Full of fruitless women and music only.
  Now perchance, when winds are assuaged at sunset,
    Lulled at the dewfall,

  By the grey sea-side, unassuaged, unheard of,
  Unbeloved, unseen in the ebb of twilight,
  Ghosts of outcast women return lamenting,
    Purged not in Lethe,

  Clothed about with flame and with tears, and singing
  Songs that move the heart of the shaken heaven,
  Songs that break the heart of the earth with pity,
    Hearing, to hear them.




AT ELEUSIS


  Men of Eleusis, ye that with long staves
  Sit in the market-houses, and speak words
  Made sweet with wisdom as the rare wine is
  Thickened with honey; and ye sons of these
  Who in the glad thick streets go up and down
  For pastime or grave traffic or mere chance;
  And all fair women having rings of gold
  On hands or hair; and chiefest over these
  I name you, daughters of this man the king,
  Who dipping deep smooth pitchers of pure brass
  Under the bubbled wells, till each round lip
  Stooped with loose gurgle of waters incoming,
  Found me an old sick woman, lamed and lean,
  Beside a growth of builded olive-boughs
  Whence multiplied thick song of thick-plumed throats--
  Also wet tears filled up my hollow hands
  By reason of my crying into them--
  And pitied me; for as cold water ran
  And washed the pitchers full from lip to lip,
  So washed both eyes full the strong salt of tears.
  And ye put water to my mouth, made sweet
  With brown hill-berries; so in time I spoke
  And gathered my loose knees from under me.
  Moreover in the broad fair halls this month
  Have I found space and bountiful abode
  To please me. I Demeter speak of this,
  Who am the mother and the mate of things:
  For as ill men by drugs or singing words
  Shut the doors inward of the narrowed womb
  Like a lock bolted with round iron through,
  Thus I shut up the body and sweet mouth
  Of all soft pasture and the tender land,
  So that no seed can enter in by it
  Though one sow thickly, nor some grain get out
  Past the hard clods men cleave and bite with steel
  To widen the sealed lips of them for use.
  None of you is there in the peopled street
  But knows how all the dry-drawn furrows ache
  With no green spot made count of in the black:
  How the wind finds no comfortable grass
  Nor is assuaged with bud nor breath of herbs;
  And in hot autumn when ye house the stacks,
  All fields are helpless in the sun, all trees
  Stand as a man stripped out of all but skin.
  Nevertheless ye sick have help to get
  By means and stablished ordinance of God;
  For God is wiser than a good man is.
  But never shall new grass be sweet in earth
  Till I get righted of my wound and wrong
  By changing counsel of ill-minded Zeus.
  For of all other gods is none save me
  Clothed with like power to build and break the year.
  I make the lesser green begin, when spring
  Touches not earth but with one fearful foot;
  And as a careful gilder with grave art
  Soberly colours and completes the face,
  Mouth, chin and all, of some sweet work in stone,
  I carve the shapes of grass and tender corn
  And colour the ripe edges and long spikes
  With the red increase and the grace of gold,
  No tradesman in soft wools is cunninger
  To kill the secret of the fat white fleece
  With stains of blue and purple wrought in it.
  Three moons were made and three moons burnt away
  While I held journey hither out of Crete
  Comfortless, tended by grave Hecate
  Whom my wound stung with double iron point;
  For all my face was like a cloth wrung out
  With close and weeping wrinkles, and both lids
  Sodden with salt continuance of tears.
  For Hades and the sidelong will of Zeus
  And that lame wisdom that has writhen feet,
  Cunning, begotten in the bed of Shame,
  These three took evil will at me, and made
  Such counsel that when time got wing to fly
  This Hades out of summer and low fields
  Forced the bright body of Persephone:
  Out of pure grass, where she lying down, red flowers
  Made their sharp little shadows on her sides,
  Pale heat, pale colour on pale maiden flesh--
  And chill water slid over her reddening feet,
  Killing the throbs in their soft blood; and birds,
  Perched next her elbow and pecking at her hair,
  Stretched their necks more to see her than even to sing.
  A sharp thing is it I have need to say;
  For Hades holding both white wrists of hers
  Unloosed the girdle and with knot by knot
  Bound her between his wheels upon the seat,
  Bound her pure body, holiest yet and dear
  To me and God as always, clothed about
  With blossoms loosened as her knees went down.
  Let fall as she let go of this and this
  By tens and twenties, tumbled to her feet,
  White waifs or purple of the pasturage.
  Therefore with only going up and down
  My feet were wasted, and the gracious air,
  To me discomfortable and dun, became
  As weak smoke blowing in the under world.
  And finding in the process of ill days
  What part had Zeus herein, and how as mate
  He coped with Hades, yokefellow in sin,
  I set my lips against the meat of gods
  And drank not neither ate or slept in heaven.
  Nor in the golden greeting of their mouths
  Did ear take note of me, nor eye at all
  Track my feet going in the ways of them.
  Like a great fire on some strait slip of land
  Between two washing inlets of wet sea
  That burns the grass up to each lip of beach
  And strengthens, waxing in the growth of wind,
  So burnt my soul in me at heaven and earth,
  Each way a ruin and a hungry plague,
  Visible evil; nor could any night
  Put cool between mine eyelids, nor the sun
  With competence of gold fill out my want.
  Yea so my flame burnt up the grass and stones,
  Shone to the salt-white edges of thin sea,
  Distempered all the gracious work, and made
  Sick change, unseasonable increase of days
  And scant avail of seasons; for by this
  The fair gods faint in hollow heaven: there comes
  No taste of burnings of the twofold fat
  To leave their palates smooth, nor in their lips
  Soft rings of smoke and weak scent wandering;
  All cattle waste and rot, and their ill smell
  Grows alway from the lank unsavoury flesh
  That no man slays for offering; the sea
  And waters moved beneath the heath and corn
  Preserve the people of fin-twinkling fish,
  And river-flies feed thick upon the smooth;
  But all earth over is no man or bird
  (Except the sweet race of the kingfisher)
  That lacks not and is wearied with much loss.
  Meantime the purple inward of the house
  Was softened with all grace of scent and sound
  In ear and nostril perfecting my praise;
  Faint grape-flowers and cloven honey-cake
  And the just grain with dues of the shed salt
  Made me content: yet my hand loosened not
  Its gripe upon your harvest all year long.
  While I, thus woman-muffled in wan flesh
  And waste externals of a perished face,
  Preserved the levels of my wrath and love
  Patiently ruled; and with soft offices
  Cooled the sharp noons and busied the warm nights
  In care of this my choice, this child my choice,
  Triptolemus, the king's selected son:
  That this fair yearlong body, which hath grown
  Strong with strange milk upon the mortal lip
  And nerved with half a god, might so increase
  Outside the bulk and the bare scope of man:
  And waxen over large to hold within
  Base breath of yours and this impoverished air,
  I might exalt him past the flame of stars,
  The limit and walled reach of the great world.
  Therefore my breast made common to his mouth
  Immortal savours, and the taste whereat
  Twice their hard life strains out the coloured veins
  And twice its brain confirms the narrow shell.
  Also at night, unwinding cloth from cloth
  As who unhusks an almond to the white
  And pastures curiously the purer taste,
  I bared the gracious limbs and the soft feet,
  Unswaddled the weak hands, and in mid ash
  Laid the sweet flesh of either feeble side,
  More tender for impressure of some touch
  Than wax to any pen; and lit around
  Fire, and made crawl the white worm-shapen flame,
  And leap in little angers spark by spark
  At head at once and feet; and the faint hair
  Hissed with rare sprinkles in the closer curl,
  And like scaled oarage of a keen thin fish
  In sea-water, so in pure fire his feet
  Struck out, and the flame bit not in his flesh,
  But like a kiss it curled his lip, and heat
  Fluttered his eyelids; so each night I blew
  The hot ash red to purge him to full god.
  Ill is it when fear hungers in the soul
  For painful food, and chokes thereon, being fed;
  And ill slant eyes interpret the straight sun,
  But in their scope its white is wried to black:
  By the queen Metaneira mean I this;
  For with sick wrath upon her lips, and heart
  Narrowing with fear the spleenful passages,
  She thought to thread this web's fine ravel out,
  Nor leave her shuttle split in combing it;
  Therefore she stole on us, and with hard sight
  Peered, and stooped close; then with pale open mouth
  As the fire smote her in the eyes between
  Cried, and the child's laugh, sharply shortening
  As fire doth under rain, fell off; the flame
  Writhed once all through and died, and in thick dark
  Tears fell from mine on the child's weeping eyes,
  Eyes dispossessed of strong inheritance
  And mortal fallen anew. Who not the less
  From bud of beard to pale-grey flower of hair
  Shall wax vinewise to a lordly vine, whose grapes
  Bleed the red heavy blood of swoln soft wine,
  Subtle with sharp leaves' intricacy, until
  Full of white years and blossom of hoary days
  I take him perfected; for whose one sake
  I am thus gracious to the least who stands
  Filleted with white wool and girt upon
  As he whose prayer endures upon the lip
  And falls not waste: wherefore let sacrifice
  Burn and run red in all the wider ways;
  Seeing I have sworn by the pale temples' band
  And poppied hair of gold Persephone
  Sad-tressed and pleached low down about her brows,
  And by the sorrow in her lips, and death
  Her dumb and mournful-mouthèd minister,
  My word for you is eased of its harsh weight
  And doubled with soft promise; and your king
  Triptolemus, this Celeus dead and swathed
  Purple and pale for golden burial,
  Shall be your helper in my services,
  Dividing earth and reaping fruits thereof
  In fields where wait, well-girt, well-wreathen, all
  The heavy-handed seasons all year through;
  Saving the choice of warm spear-headed grain,
  And stooping sharp to the slant-sided share
  All beasts that furrow the remeasured land
  With their bowed necks of burden equable.




AUGUST


  There were four apples on the bough,
  Half gold half red, that one might know
  The blood was ripe inside the core;
  The colour of the leaves was more
  Like stems of yellow corn that grow
  Through all the gold June meadow's floor.

  The warm smell of the fruit was good
  To feed on, and the split green wood,
  With all its bearded lips and stains
  Of mosses in the cloven veins,
  Most pleasant, if one lay or stood
  In sunshine or in happy rains.

  There were four apples on the tree,
  Red stained through gold, that all might see
  The sun went warm from core to rind;
  The green leaves made the summer blind
  In that soft place they kept for me
  With golden apples shut behind.

  The leaves caught gold across the sun,
  And where the bluest air begun
  Thirsted for song to help the heat;
  As I to feel my lady's feet
  Draw close before the day were done;
  Both lips grew dry with dreams of it.

  In the mute August afternoon
  They trembled to some undertune
  Of music in the silver air;
  Great pleasure was it to be there
  Till green turned duskier and the moon
  Coloured the corn-sheaves like gold hair.

  That August time it was delight
  To watch the red moons wane to white
  'Twixt grey seamed stems of apple-trees;
  A sense of heavy harmonies
  Grew on the growth of patient night,
  More sweet than shapen music is.

  But some three hours before the moon
  The air, still eager from the noon,
  Flagged after heat, not wholly dead;
  Against the stem I leant my head;
  The colour soothed me like a tune,
  Green leaves all round the gold and red.

  I lay there till the warm smell grew
  More sharp, when flecks of yellow dew
  Between the round ripe leaves had blurred
  The rind with stain and wet; I heard
  A wind that blew and breathed and blew,
  Too weak to alter its one word.

  The wet leaves next the gentle fruit
  Felt smoother, and the brown tree-root
  Felt the mould warmer: I too felt
  (As water feels the slow gold melt
  Right through it when the day burns mute)
  The peace of time wherein love dwelt.

  There were four apples on the tree,
  Gold stained on red that all might see
  The sweet blood filled them to the core:
  The colour of her hair is more
  Like stems of fair faint gold, that be
  Mown from the harvest's middle floor.




A CHRISTMAS CAROL[5]

    [5] Suggested by a drawing of Mr. D. G. Rossetti's.


  Three damsels in the queen's chamber,
      The queen's mouth was most fair;
  She spake a word of God's mother
      As the combs went in her hair.
          Mary that is of might,
          Bring us to thy Son's sight.

  They held the gold combs out from her,
      A span's length off her head;
  She sang this song of God's mother
      And of her bearing-bed.
          Mary most full of grace,
          Bring us to thy Son's face.

  When she sat at Joseph's hand,
      She looked against her side;
  And either way from the short silk band
      Her girdle was all wried.
          Mary that all good may,
          Bring us to thy Son's way.

  Mary had three women for her bed,
      The twain were maidens clean;
  The first of them had white and red,
      The third had riven green.
          Mary that is so sweet,
          Bring us to thy Son's feet.

  She had three women for her hair,
      Two were gloved soft and shod;
  The third had feet and fingers bare,
      She was the likest God.
          Mary that wieldeth land,
          Bring us to thy Son's hand.

  She had three women for her ease,
      The twain were good women:
  The first two were the two Maries,
      The third was Magdalen.
          Mary that perfect is,
          Bring us to thy Son's kiss.

  Joseph had three workmen in his stall,
      To serve him well upon;
  The first of them were Peter and Paul,
      The third of them was John.
          Mary, God's handmaiden,
          Bring us to thy Son's ken.

  "If your child be none other man's,
      But if it be very mine,
  The bedstead shall be gold two spans,
      The bedfoot silver fine."
          Mary that made God mirth,
          Bring us to thy Son's birth.

  "If the child be some other man's,
      And if it be none of mine,
  The manger shall be straw two spans,
      Betwixen kine and kine."
          Mary that made sin cease,
          Bring us to thy Son's peace.

  Christ was born upon this wise,
      It fell on such a night,
  Neither with sounds of psalteries,
      Nor with fire for light.
          Mary that is God's spouse,
          Bring us to thy Son's house.

  The star came out upon the east
      With a great sound and sweet:
  Kings gave gold to make him feast
      And myrrh for him to eat.
          Mary, of thy sweet mood,
          Bring us to thy Son's good.

  He had two handmaids at his head,
      One handmaid at his feet;
  The twain of them were fair and red,
      The third one was right sweet.
          Mary that is most wise,
          Bring us to thy Son's eyes. Amen.




THE MASQUE OF QUEEN BERSABE

A MIRACLE-PLAY


  KING DAVID

  Knights mine, all that be in hall,
  I have a counsel to you all,
  Because of this thing God lets fall
      Among us for a sign.
  For some days hence as I did eat
  From kingly dishes my good meat,
  There flew a bird between my feet
      As red as any wine.
  This bird had a long bill of red
  And a gold ring above his head;
  Long time he sat and nothing said,
  Put softly down his neck and fed
      From the gilt patens fine:
  And as I marvelled, at the last
  He shut his two keen eyën fast
  And suddenly woxe big and brast
      Ere one should tell to nine.


  PRIMUS MILES

  Sir, note this that I will say;
  That Lord who maketh corn with hay
  And morrows each of yesterday,
      He hath you in his hand,


  SECUNDUS MILES (_Paganus quidam_)

  By Satan I hold no such thing;
  For if wine swell within a king
  Whose ears for drink are hot and ring,
  The same shall dream of wine-bibbing
      Whilst he can lie or stand.


  QUEEN BERSABE

  Peace now, lords, for Godis head,
  Ye chirk as starlings that be fed
  And gape as fishes newly dead;
  The devil put your bones to bed,
      Lo, this is all to say.


  SECUNDUS MILES

  By Mahound, lords, I have good will
  This devil's bird to wring and spill;
  For now meseems our game goes ill,
      Ye have scant hearts to play.


  TERTIUS MILES

  Lo, sirs, this word is there said,
  That Urias the knight is dead
  Through some ill craft; by Poulis head,
  I doubt his blood hath made so red
  This bird that flew from the queen's bed
      Whereof ye have such fear.


  KING DAVID

  Yea, my good knave, and is it said
  That I can raise men from the dead?
  By God I think to have his head
  Who saith words of my lady's bed
      For any thief to hear.
    _Et percutiat eum in capite._


  QUEEN BERSABE

  I wis men shall spit at me,
  And say, it were but right for thee
  That one should hang thee on a tree;
  Ho! it were a fair thing to see
  The big stones bruise her false body;
      Fie! who shall see her dead?


  KING DAVID

  I rede you have no fear of this,
  For, as ye wot, the first good kiss
  I had must be the last of his;
  Now are ye queen of mine, I wis,
  And lady of a house that is
      Full rich of meat and bread.


  PRIMUS MILES

  I bid you make good cheer to be
  So fair a queen as all men see.
  And hold us for your lieges free;
  By Peter's soul that hath the key,
      Ye have good hap of it.


  SECUNDUS MILES

  I would that he were hanged and dead
  Who hath no joy to see your head
  With gold about it, barred on red;
  I hold him as a sow of lead
      That is so scant of wit.


  _Tunc dicat NATHAN propheta_

  O king, I have a word to thee;
  The child that is in Bersabe
  Shall wither without light to see;
  This word is come of God by me
      For sin that ye have done.
  Because herein ye did not right,
  To take the fair one lamb to smite
  That was of Urias the knight;
      Ye wist he had but one.
  Full many sheep I wot ye had,
  And many women, when ye bade,
  To do your will and keep you glad,
  And a good crown about your head
      With gold to show thereon.
  This Urias had one poor house
  With low-barred latoun shot-windows
  And scant of corn to fill a mouse;
  And rusty basnets for his brows,
      To wear them to the bone.
  Yea the roofs also, as men sain,
  Were thin to hold against the rain;
  Therefore what rushes were there lain
  Grew wet withouten foot of men;
  The stancheons were all gone in twain
      As sick man's flesh is gone.
  Nathless he had great joy to see
  The long hair of this Bersabe
  Fall round her lap and round her knee
  Even to her small soft feet, that be
  Shod now with crimson royally
      And covered with clean gold.
  Likewise great joy he had to kiss
  Her throat, where now the scarlet is
  Against her little chin, I wis,
      That then was but cold.
  No scarlet then her kirtle had
  And little gold about it sprad;
  But her red mouth was always glad
  To kiss, albeit the eyes were sad
      With love they had to hold.


  SECUNDUS MILES

  How! old thief, thy wits are lame;
  To clip such it is no shame;
  I rede you in the devil's name,
  Ye come not here to make men game;
  By Termagaunt that maketh grame,
      I shall to-bete thine head.
    _Hìc Diabolus capiat eum._
  This knave hath sharp fingers, perfay;
  Mahound you thank and keep alway,
  And give you good knees to pray;
  What man hath no lust to play,
  The devil wring his ears, I say;
  There is no more but wellaway,
      For now am I dead.


  KING DAVID

  Certes his mouth is wried and black,
  Full little pence be in his sack;
  This devil hath him by the back,
      It is no boot to lie.


  NATHAN

  Sitteth now still and learn of me;
  A little while and ye shall see
  The face of God's strength presently.
  All queens made as this Bersabe,
  All that were fair and foul ye be,
      Come hither; it am I.

      _Et hìc omnes cantabunt._


  HERODIAS

  I am the queen Herodias.
  This headband of my temples was
      King Herod's gold band woven me.
  This broken dry staff in my hand
  Was the queen's staff of a great land
      Betwixen Perse and Samarie.
  For that one dancing of my feet,
  The fire is come in my green wheat,
      From one sea to the other sea.


  AHOLIBAH

  I am the queen Aholibah.
  My lips kissed dumb the word of _Ah_
      Sighed on strange lips grown sick thereby.
  God wrought to me my royal bed;
  The inner work thereof was red,
      The outer work was ivory.
  My mouth's heat was the heat of flame
  For lust towards the kings that came
      With horsemen riding royally.


  CLEOPATRA

  I am the queen of Ethiope.
  Love bade my kissing eyelids ope
      That men beholding might praise love.
  My hair was wonderful and curled;
  My lips held fast the mouth o' the world
      To spoil the strength and speech thereof.
  The latter triumph in my breath
  Bowed down the beaten brows of death,
      Ashamed they had not wrath enough.


  ABIHAIL

  I am the queen of Tyrians.
  My hair was glorious for twelve spans,
      That dried to loose dust afterward.
  My stature was a strong man's length:
  My neck was like a place of strength
      Built with white walls, even and hard,
  Like the first noise of rain leaves catch
  One from another, snatch by snatch,
      Is my praise, hissed against and marred.


  AZUBAH

  I am the queen of Amorites.
  My face was like a place of lights
      With multitudes at festival.
  The glory of my gracious brows
  Was like God's house made glorious
      With colours upon either wall.
  Between my brows and hair there was
  A white space like a space of glass
      With golden candles over all.


  AHOLAH

  I am the queen of Amalek.
  There was no tender touch or fleck
      To spoil my body or bared feet.
  My words were soft like dulcimers,
  And the first sweet of grape-flowers
      Made each side of my bosom sweet.
  My raiment was as tender fruit
  Whose rind smells sweet of spice-tree root,
      Bruised balm-blossom and budded wheat.


  AHINOAM

  I am the queen Ahinoam.
  Like the throat of a soft slain lamb
      Was my throat, softer veined than his:
  My lips were as two grapes the sun
  Lays his whole weight of heat upon
      Like a mouth heavy with a kiss:
  My hair's pure purple a wrought fleece,
  My temples therein as a piece
      Of a pomegranate's cleaving is.


  ATARAH

  I am the queen Sidonian.
  My face made faint the face of man,
      And strength was bound between my brows
  Spikenard was hidden in my ships,
  Honey and wheat and myrrh in strips,
      White wools that shine as colour does,
  Soft linen dyed upon the fold,
  Split spice and cores of scented gold,
      Cedar and broken calamus.


  SEMIRAMIS

  I am the queen Semiramis.
  The whole world and the sea that is
      In fashion like a chrysopras,
  The noise of all men labouring,
  The priest's mouth tired through thanksgiving,
      The sound of love in the blood's pause,
  The strength of love in the blood's beat,
  All these were cast beneath my feet
      And all found lesser than I was.


  HESIONE

  I am the queen Hesione.
  The seasons that increased in me
      Made my face fairer than all men's.
  I had the summer in my hair;
  And all the pale gold autumn air
      Was as the habit of my sense.
  My body was as fire that shone;
  God's beauty that makes all things one
      Was one among my handmaidens.


  CHRYSOTHEMIS

  I am the queen of Samothrace.
  God, making roses, made my face
      As a rose filled up full with red.
  My prows made sharp the straitened seas
  From Pontus to that Chersonese
      Whereon the ebbed Asian stream is shed.
  My hair was as sweet scent that drips;
  Love's breath begun about my lips
      Kindled the lips of people dead.


  THOMYRIS

  I am the queen of Scythians.
  My strength was like no strength of man's,
      My face like day, my breast like spring.
  My fame was felt in the extreme land
  That hath sunshine on the one hand
      And on the other star-shining.
  Yea, and the wind there fails of breath;
  Yea, and there life is waste like death;
      Yea, and there death is a glad thing.


  HARHAS

  I am the queen of Anakim.
  In the spent years whose speech is dim,
      Whose raiment is the dust and death,
  My stately body without stain
  Shone as the shining race of rain
      Whose hair a great wind scattereth.
  Now hath God turned my lips to sighs,
  Plucked off mine eyelids from mine eyes,
      And sealed with seals my way of breath.


  MYRRHA

  I am the queen Arabian.
  The tears wherewith mine eyelids ran
      Smelt like my perfumed eyelids' smell.
  A harsh thirst made my soft mouth hard,
  That ached with kisses afterward;
      My brain rang like a beaten bell.
  As tears on eyes, as fire on wood,
  Sin fed upon my breath and blood,
      Sin made my breasts subside and swell.


  PASIPHAE

  I am the queen Pasiphae.
  Not all the pure clean-coloured sea
      Could cleanse or cool my yearning veins;
  Nor any root nor herb that grew,
  Flag-leaves that let green water through,
      Nor washing of the dews and rains.
  From shame's pressed core I wrung the sweet
  Fruit's savour that was death to eat,
      Whereof no seed but death remains.


  SAPPHO

  I am the queen of Lesbians.
  My love, that had no part in man's,
      Was sweeter than all shape of sweet.
  The intolerable infinite desire
  Made my face pale like faded fire
      When the ashen pyre falls through with heat.
  My blood was hot wan wine of love,
  And my song's sound the sound thereof,
      The sound of the delight of it.


  MESSALINA

  I am the queen of Italy.
  These were the signs God set on me;
      A barren beauty subtle and sleek,
  Curled carven hair, and cheeks worn wan
  With fierce false lips of many a man,
      Large temples where the blood ran weak,
  A mouth athirst and amorous
  And hungering as the grave's mouth does
      That, being an-hungred, cannot speak.


  AMESTRIS

  I am the queen of Persians.
  My breasts were lordlier than bright swans.
      My body as amber fair and thin.
  Strange flesh was given my lips for bread,
  With poisonous hours my days were fed,
      And my feet shod with adder-skin.
  In Shushan toward Ecbatane
  I wrought my joys with tears and pain,
      My loves with blood and bitter sin.


  EPHRATH

  I am the queen of Rephaim.
  God, that some while refraineth him,
      Made in the end a spoil of me.
  My rumour was upon the world
  As strong sound of swoln water hurled
      Through porches of the straining sea.
  My hair was like the flag-flower,
  And my breasts carven goodlier
      Than beryl with chalcedony.


  PASITHEA

  I am the queen of Cypriotes.
  Mine oarsmen, labouring with brown throats,
      Sang of me many a tender thing.
  My maidens, girdled loose and braced
  With gold from bosom to white waist,
      Praised me between their wool-combing.
  All that praise Venus all night long
  With lips like speech and lids like song
      Praised me till song lost heart to sing.


  ALACIEL

  I am the queen Alaciel.
  My mouth was like that moist gold cell
      Whereout the thickest honey drips.
  Mine eyes were as a grey-green sea;
  The amorous blood that smote on me
      Smote to my feet and finger-tips.
  My throat was whiter than the dove,
  Mine eyelids as the seals of love,
      And as the doors of love my lips.


  ERIGONE

  I am the queen Erigone.
  The wild wine shed as blood on me
      Made my face brighter than a bride's.
  My large lips had the old thirst of earth,
  Mine arms the might of the old sea's girth
      Bound round the whole world's iron sides.
  Within mine eyes and in mine ears
  Were music and the wine of tears,
      And light, and thunder of the tides.
        _Et hìc exeant, et dicat Bersabe regina_;

  Alas, God, for thy great pity
  And for the might that is in thee,
  Behold, I woful Bersabe
  Cry out with stoopings of my knee
  And thy wrath laid and bound on me
      Till I may see thy love.
  Behold, Lord, this child is grown
  Within me between bone and bone
  To make me mother of a son,
  Made of my body with strong moan;
  There shall not be another one
      That shall be made hereof.


  KING DAVID

  Lord God, alas, what shall I sain?
  Lo, thou art as an hundred men
  Both to break and build again:
  The wild ways thou makest plain,
  Thine hands hold the hail and rain,
  And thy fingers both grape and grain;
  Of their largess we be all well fain,
      And of their great pity:
  The sun thou madest of good gold,
  Of clean silver the moon cold,
  All the great stars thou hast told
  As thy cattle in thy fold
  Every one by his name of old;
  Wind and water thou hast in hold,
      Both the land and the long sea;
  Both the green sea and the land,
  Lord God, thou hast in hand,
  Both white water and grey sand;
  Upon thy right or thy left hand
  There is no man that may stand;
      Lord, thou rue on me.
  O wise Lord, if thou be keen
  To note things amiss that been,
  I am not worth a shell of bean
  More than an old mare meagre and lean;
  For all my wrong-doing with my queen,
  It grew not of our heartès clean,
      But it began of her body.
  For it fell in the hot May
  I stood within a paven way
  Built of fair bright stone, perfay,
  That is as fire of night and day
      And lighteth all my house.
  Therein be neither stones nor sticks,
  Neither red nor white bricks,
  But for cubits five or six
  There is most goodly sardonyx
      And amber laid in rows.
  It goes round about my roofs,
  (If ye list ye shall have proofs)
  There is good space for horse and hoofs,
      Plain and nothing perilous.
  For the fair green weather's heat,
  And for the smell of leavès sweet,
  It is no marvel, well ye weet,
      A man to waxen amorous.
  This I say now by my case
  That spied forth of that royal place;
  There I saw in no great space
  Mine own sweet, both body and face,
  Under the fresh boughs.
  In a water that was there
  She wesshe her goodly body bare
  And dried it with her owen hair:
  Both her arms and her knees fair,
      Both bosom and brows;
  Both shoulders and eke thighs
  Tho she wesshe upon this wise;
  Ever she sighed with little sighs,
    And ever she gave God thank.
  Yea, God wot I can well see yet
  Both her breast and her sides all wet
  And her long hair withouten let
  Spread sideways like a drawing net;
  Full dear bought and full far fet
  Was that sweet thing there y-set;
  It were a hard thing to forget
  How both lips and eyen met,
      Breast and breath sank.
  So goodly a sight as there she was,
  Lying looking on her glass
  By wan water in green grass,
      Yet saw never man.
  So soft and great she was and bright
  With all her body waxen white,
  I woxe nigh blind to see the light
  Shed out of it to left and right;
  This bitter sin from that sweet sight
      Between us twain began.


  NATHAN

  Now, sir, be merry anon,
  For ye shall have a full wise son,
  Goodly and great of flesh and bone;
  There shall no king be such an one,
      I swear by Godis rood.
  Therefore, lord, be merry here,
  And go to meat withouten fear,
  And hear a mass with goodly cheer;
  For to all folk ye shall be dear,
      And all folk of your blood.

      _Et tunc dicant Laudamus._




ST. DOROTHY


  It hath been seen and yet it shall be seen
  That out of tender mouths God's praise hath been
  Made perfect, and with wood and simple string
  He hath played music sweet as shawm-playing
  To please himself with softness of all sound;
  And no small thing but hath been sometime found
  Full sweet of use, and no such humbleness
  But God hath bruised withal the sentences
  And evidence of wise men witnessing;
  No leaf that is so soft a hidden thing
  It never shall get sight of the great sun;
  The strength of ten has been the strength of one,
  And lowliness has waxed imperious.
    There was in Rome a man Theophilus
  Of right great blood and gracious ways, that had
  All noble fashions to make people glad
  And a soft life of pleasurable days;
  He was a goodly man for one to praise,
  Flawless and whole upward from foot to head;
  His arms were a red hawk that alway fed
  On a small bird with feathers gnawed upon,
  Beaten and plucked about the bosom-bone
  Whereby a small round fleck like fire there was:
  They called it in their tongue lampadias;
  This was the banner of the lordly man.
  In many straits of sea and reaches wan
  Full of quick wind, and many a shaken firth,
  It had seen fighting days of either earth,
  Westward or east of waters Gaditane
  (This was the place of sea-rocks under Spain
  Called after the great praise of Hercules)
  And north beyond the washing Pontic seas,
  Far windy Russian places fabulous,
  And salt fierce tides of storm-swoln Bosphorus.
    Now as this lord came straying in Rome town
  He saw a little lattice open down
  And after it a press of maidens' heads
  That sat upon their cold small quiet beds
  Talking, and played upon short-stringèd lutes;
  And other some ground perfume out of roots
  Gathered by marvellous moons in Asia;
  Saffron and aloes and wild cassia,
  Coloured all through and smelling of the sun;
  And over all these was a certain one
  Clothed softly, with sweet herbs about her hair
  And bosom flowerful; her face more fair
  Than sudden-singing April in soft lands:
  Eyed like a gracious bird, and in both hands
  She held a psalter painted green and red.
    This Theophile laughed at the heart, and said,
  Now God so help me hither and St. Paul,
  As by the new time of their festival
  I have good will to take this maid to wife.
  And herewith fell to fancies of her life
  And soft half-thoughts that ended suddenly.
  This is man's guise to please himself, when he
  Shall not see one thing of his pleasant things,
  Nor with outwatch of many travailings
  Come to be eased of the least pain he hath
  For all his love and all his foolish wrath
  And all the heavy manner of his mind.
  Thus is he like a fisher fallen blind
  That casts his nets across the boat awry
  To strike the sea, but lo, he striketh dry
  And plucks them back all broken for his pain
  And bites his beard and casts across again
  And reaching wrong slips over in the sea.
  So hath this man a strangled neck for fee,
  For all his cost he chuckles in his throat.
    This Theophile that little hereof wote
  Laid wait to hear of her what she might be:
  Men told him she had name of Dorothy,
  And was a lady of a worthy house.
  Thereat this knight grew inly glorious
  That he should have a love so fair of place.
  She was a maiden of most quiet face,
  Tender of speech, and had no hardihood
  But was nigh feeble of her fearful blood;
  Her mercy in her was so marvellous
  From her least years, that seeing her school-fellows
  That read beside her stricken with a rod,
  She would cry sore and say some word to God
  That he would ease her fellow of his pain.
  There is no touch of sun or fallen rain
  That ever fell on a more gracious thing.
    In middle Rome there was in stone-working
  The church of Venus painted royally.
  The chapels of it were some two or three,
  In each of them her tabernacle was
  And a wide window of six feet in glass
  Coloured with all her works in red and gold.
  The altars had bright cloths and cups to hold
  The wine of Venus for the services,
  Made out of honey and crushed wood-berries
  That shed sweet yellow through the thick wet red,
  That on high days was borne upon the head
  Of Venus' priest for any man to drink;
  So that in drinking he should fall to think
  On some fair face, and in the thought thereof
  Worship, and such should triumph in his love.
  For this soft wine that did such grace and good
  Was new trans-shaped and mixed with Love's own blood,
  That in the fighting Trojan time was bled;
  For which came such a woe to Diomed
  That he was stifled after in hard sea.
  And some said that this wine-shedding should be
  Made of the falling of Adonis' blood,
  That curled upon the thorns and broken wood
  And round the gold silk shoes on Venus' feet;
  The taste thereof was as hot honey sweet
  And in the mouth ran soft and riotous.
  This was the holiness of Venus' house.
    It was their worship, that in August days
  Twelve maidens should go through those Roman ways
  Naked, and having gold across their brows
  And their hair twisted in short golden rows,
  To minister to Venus in this wise:
  And twelve men chosen in their companies
  To match these maidens by the altar-stair,
  All in one habit, crowned upon the hair.
  Among these men was chosen Theophile.
    This knight went out and prayed a little while,
  Holding queen Venus by her hands and knees;
  I will give thee twelve royal images
  Cut in glad gold, with marvels of wrought stone
  For thy sweet priests to lean and pray upon,
  Jasper and hyacinth and chrysopras,
  And the strange Asian thalamite that was
  Hidden twelve ages under heavy sea
  Among the little sleepy pearls, to be
  A shrine lit over with soft candle-flame
  Burning all night red as hot brows of shame,
  So thou wilt be my lady without sin.
  Goddess that art all gold outside and in,
  Help me to serve thee in thy holy way.
  Thou knowest, Love, that in my bearing day
  There shone a laughter in the singing stars
  Round the gold-ceilèd bride-bed wherein Mars
  Touched thee and had thee in your kissing wise.
  Now therefore, sweet, kiss thou my maiden's eyes
  That they may open graciously towards me;
  And this new fashion of thy shrine shall be
  As soft with gold as thine own happy head.
    The goddess, that was painted with face red
  Between two long green tumbled sides of sea,
  Stooped her neck sideways, and spake pleasantly:
  Thou shalt have grace as thou art thrall of mine.
  And with this came a savour of shed wine
  And plucked-out petals from a rose's head:
  And softly with slow laughs of lip she said,
  Thou shalt have favour all thy days of me.
    Then came Theophilus to Dorothy,
  Saying: O sweet, if one should strive or speak
  Against God's ways, he gets a beaten cheek
  For all his wage and shame above all men.
  Therefore I have no will to turn again
  When God saith "go," lest a worse thing fall out.
  Then she, misdoubting lest he went about
  To catch her wits, made answer somewhat thus:
  I have no will, my lord Theophilus,
  To speak against this worthy word of yours;
  Knowing how God's will in all speech endures,
  That save by grace there may no thing be said,
  Then Theophile waxed light from foot to head,
  And softly fell upon this answering.
  It is well seen you are a chosen thing
  To do God service in his gracious way.
  I will that you make haste and holiday
  To go next year upon the Venus stair,
  Covered none else, but crowned upon your hair,
  And do the service that a maiden doth.
  She said: but I that am Christ's maid were loth
  To do this thing that hath such bitter name.
  Thereat his brows were beaten with sore shame
  And he came off and said no other word.
  Then his eyes chanced upon his banner-bird,
  And he fell fingering at the staff of it
  And laughed for wrath and stared between his feet,
  And out of a chafed heart he spake as thus:
  Lo how she japes at me Theophilus,
  Feigning herself a fool and hard to love;
  Yet in good time for all she boasteth of
  She shall be like a little beaten bird.
  And while his mouth was open in that word
  He came upon the house Janiculum,
  Where some went busily, and other some
  Talked in the gate called the gate glorious.
  The emperor, which was one Gabalus,
  Sat over all and drank chill wine alone.
  To whom is come Theophilus anon,
  And said as thus: _Beau sire, Dieu vous aide_.
  And afterward sat under him, and said
  All this thing through as ye have wholly heard.
    This Gabalus laughed thickly in his beard.
  Yea, this is righteousness and maiden rule.
  Truly, he said, a maid is but a fool.
  And japed at them as one full villainous,
  In a lewd wise, this heathen Gabalus,
  And sent his men to bind her as he bade.
  Thus have they taken Dorothy the maid,
  And haled her forth as men hale pick-purses:
  A little need God knows they had of this,
  To hale her by her maiden gentle hair.
  Thus went she lowly, making a soft prayer,
  As one who stays the sweet wine in his mouth,
  Murmuring with eased lips, and is most loth
  To have done wholly with the sweet of it.
    Christ king, fair Christ, that knowest all men's wit
  And all the feeble fashion of my ways,
  O perfect God, that from all yesterdays
  Abidest whole with morrows perfected,
  I pray thee by thy mother's holy head
  Thou help me to do right, that I not slip:
  I have no speech nor strength upon my lip,
  Except thou help me who art wise and sweet.
  Do this too for those nails that clove thy feet,
  Let me die maiden after many pains.
  Though I be least among thy handmaidens,
  Doubtless I shall take death more sweetly thus.
    Now have they brought her to King Gabalus,
  Who laughed in all his throat some breathing-whiles:
  By God, he said, if one should leap two miles,
  He were not pained about the sides so much.
  This were a soft thing for a man to touch.
  Shall one so chafe that hath such little bones?
  And shook his throat with thick and chuckled moans
  For laughter that she had such holiness.
  What aileth thee, wilt thou do services?
  It were good fare to fare as Venus doth.
    Then said this lady with her maiden mouth,
  Shamefaced, and something paler in the cheek:
  Now, sir, albeit my wit and will to speak
  Give me no grace in sight of worthy men,
  For all my shame yet know I this again,
  I may not speak, nor after downlying
  Rise up to take delight in lute-playing,
  Nor sing nor sleep, nor sit and fold my hands,
  But my soul in some measure understands
  God's grace laid like a garment over me.
  For this fair God that out of strong sharp sea
  Lifted the shapely and green-coloured land,
  And hath the weight of heaven in his hand
  As one might hold a bird, and under him
  The heavy golden planets beam by beam
  Building the feasting-chambers of his house,
  And the large world he holdeth with his brows,
  And with the light of them astonisheth
  All place and time and face of life and death
  And motion of the north wind and the south,
  And is the sound within his angel's mouth
  Of singing words and words of thanksgiving,
  And is the colour of the latter spring
  And heat upon the summer and the sun,
  And is beginning of all things begun
  And gathers in him all things to their end,
  And with the fingers of his hand doth bend
  The stretched-out sides of heaven like a sail,
  And with his breath he maketh the red pale
  And fills with blood faint faces of men dead,
  And with the sound between his lips are fed
  Iron and fire and the white body of snow,
  And blossom of all trees in places low,
  And small bright herbs about the little hills,
  And fruit pricked softly with birds' tender bills,
  And flight of foam about green fields of sea,
  And fourfold strength of the great winds that be
  Moved always outward from beneath his feet,
  And growth of grass and growth of sheavèd wheat
  And all green flower of goodly-growing lands;
  And all these things he gathers with his hands
  And covers all their beauty with his wings;
  The same, even God that governs all these things,
  Hath set my feet to be upon his ways.
  Now therefore for no painfulness of days
  I shall put off this service bound on me.
  Also, fair sir, ye know this certainly,
  How God was in his flesh full chaste and meek
  And gave his face to shame, and either cheek
  Gave up to smiting of men tyrannous.
    And here with a great voice this Gabalus
  Cried out and said: By God's blood and his bones,
  This were good game betwixen night and nones
  For one to sit and hearken to such saws:
  I were as lief fall in some big beast's jaws
  As hear these women's jaw-teeth clattering;
  By God a woman is the harder thing,
  One may not put a hook into her mouth.
  Now by St. Luke I am so sore adrouth
  For all these saws I must needs drink again.
  But I pray God deliver all us men
  From all such noise of women and their heat.
  That is a noble scripture, well I weet,
  That likens women to an empty can;
  When God said that he was a full wise man,
  I trow no man may blame him as for that.
    And herewithal he drank a draught, and spat,
  And said: Now shall I make an end hereof.
  Come near all men and hearken for God's love,
  And ye shall hear a jest or twain, God wot.
  And spake as thus with mouth full thick and hot;
  But thou do this thou shalt be shortly slain.
  Lo, sir, she said, this death and all this pain
  I take in penance of my bitter sins.
  Yea now, quoth Gabalus, this game begins.
  Lo, without sin one shall not live a span.
  Lo, this is she that would not look on man
  Between her fingers folded in thwart wise.
  See how her shame hath smitten in her eyes
  That was so clean she had not heard of shame.
  Certes, he said, by Gabalus my name,
  This two years back I was not so well pleased.
  This were good mirth for sick men to be eased
  And rise up whole and laugh at hearing of.
  I pray thee show us something of thy love,
  Since thou wast maid thy gown is waxen wide.
  Yea, maid I am, she said, and somewhat sighed,
  As one who thought upon the low fair house
  Where she sat working, with soft bended brows
  Watching her threads, among the school-maidens.
  And she thought well now God had brought her thence
  She should not come to sew her gold again.
    Then cried King Gabalus upon his men
  To have her forth and draw her with steel gins.
  And as a man hag-ridden beats and grins
  And bends his body sidelong in his bed,
  So wagged he with his body and knave's head,
  Gaping at her, and blowing with his breath.
  And in good time he gat an evil death
  Out of his lewdness with his cursèd wives:
  His bones were hewn asunder as with knives
  For his misliving, certes it is said.
  But all the evil wrought upon this maid,
  It were full hard for one to handle it.
  For her soft blood was shed upon her feet,
  And all her body's colour bruised and faint.
  But she, as one abiding God's great saint,
  Spake not nor wept for all this travail hard.
  Wherefore the king commanded afterward
  To slay her presently in all men's sight.
  And it was now an hour upon the night
  And winter-time, and a few stars began.
  The weather was yet feeble and all wan
  For beating of a weighty wind and snow.
  And she came walking in soft wise and slow,
  And many men with faces piteous.
  Then came this heavy cursing Gabalus,
  That swore full hard into his drunken beard;
  And faintly after without any word
  Came Theophile some paces off the king.
  And in the middle of this wayfaring
  Full tenderly beholding her he said:
    There is no word of comfort with men dead
  Nor any face and colour of things sweet;
  But always with lean cheeks and lifted feet
  These dead men lie all aching to the blood
  With bitter cold, their brows withouten hood
  Beating for chill, their bodies swathed full thin:
  Alas, what hire shall any have herein
  To give his life and get such bitterness?
  Also the soul going forth bodiless
  Is hurt with naked cold, and no man saith
  If there be house or covering for death
  To hide the soul that is discomforted.
    Then she beholding him a little said:
  Alas, fair lord, ye have no wit of this;
  For on one side death is full poor of bliss
  And as ye say full sharp of bone and lean:
  But on the other side is good and green
  And hath soft flower of tender-coloured hair
  Grown on his head, and a red mouth as fair
  As may be kissed with lips; thereto his face
  Is as God's face, and in a perfect place
  Full of all sun and colour of straight boughs
  And waterheads about a painted house
  That hath a mile of flowers either way
  Outward from it, and blossom-grass of May
  Thickening on many a side for length of heat,
  Hath God set death upon a noble seat
  Covered with green and flowered in the fold,
  In likeness of a great king grown full old
  And gentle with new temperance of blood;
  And on his brows a purfled purple hood,
  They may not carry any golden thing;
  And plays some tune with subtle fingering
  On a small cithern, full of tears and sleep
  And heavy pleasure that is quick to weep
  And sorrow with the honey in her mouth;
  And for this might of music that he doth
  Are all souls drawn toward him with great love
  And weep for sweetness of the noise thereof
  And bow to him with worship of their knees;
  And all the field is thick with companies
  Of fair-clothed men that play on shawms and lutes
  And gather honey of the yellow fruits
  Between the branches waxen soft and wide:
  And all this peace endures in either side
  Of the green land, and God beholdeth all.
  And this is girdled with a round fair wall
  Made of red stone and cool with heavy leaves
  Grown out against it, and green blossom cleaves
  To the green chinks, and lesser wall-weed sweet,
  Kissing the crannies that are split with heat,
  And branches where the summer draws to head.
    And Theophile burnt in the cheek, and said:
  Yea, could one see it, this were marvellous.
  I pray you, at your coming to this house,
  Give me some leaf of all those tree-branches;
  Seeing how so sharp and white our weather is,
  There is no green nor gracious red to see.
    Yea, sir, she said, that shall I certainly.
  And from her long sweet throat without a fleck
  Undid the gold, and through her stretched-out neck
  The cold axe clove, and smote away her head:
  Out of her throat the tender blood full red
  Fell suddenly through all her long soft hair.
  And with good speed for hardness of the air
  Each man departed to his house again.
    Lo, as fair colour in the face of men
  At seed-time of their blood, or in such wise
  As a thing seen increaseth in men's eyes,
  Caught first far off by sickly fits of sight,
  So a word said, if one shall hear aright,
  Abides against the season of its growth.
  This Theophile went slowly, as one doth
  That is not sure for sickness of his feet;
  And counting the white stonework of the street,
  Tears fell out of his eyes for wrath and love,
  Making him weep more for the shame thereof
  Than for true pain: so went he half a mile.
  And women mocked him, saying: Theophile,
  Lo, she is dead; what shall a woman have
  That loveth such an one? so Christ me save,
  I were as lief to love a man new-hung.
  Surely this man has bitten on his tongue,
  This makes him sad and writhled in his face.
    And when they came upon the paven place
  That was called sometime the place amorous
  There came a child before Theophilus
  Bearing a basket, and said suddenly:
  Fair sir, this is my mistress Dorothy
  That sends you gifts; and with this he was gone.
  In all this earth there is not such an one
  For colour and straight stature made so fair.
  The tender growing gold of his pure hair
  Was as wheat growing, and his mouth as flame.
  God called him Holy after his own name;
  With gold cloth like fire burning he was clad.
  But for the fair green basket that he had,
  It was filled up with heavy white and red;
  Great roses stained still where the first rose bled,
  Burning at heart for shame their heart withholds:
  And the sad colour of strong marigolds
  That have the sun to kiss their lips for love;
  The flower that Venus' hair is woven of,
  The colour of fair apples in the sun,
  Late peaches gathered when the heat was done
  And the slain air got breath; and after these
  The fair faint-headed poppies drunk with ease,
  And heaviness of hollow lilies red.
    Then cried they all that saw these things, and said
  It was God's doing, and was marvellous.
  And in brief while this knight Theophilus
  Is waxen full of faith, and witnesseth
  Before the king of God and love and death,
  For which the king bade hang him presently.
  A gallows of a goodly piece of tree
  This Gabalus hath made to hang him on.
  Forth of this world lo Theophile is gone
  With a wried neck, God give us better fare
  Than his that hath a twisted throat to wear;
  But truly for his love God hath him brought
  There where his heavy body grieves him nought
  Nor all the people plucking at his feet;
  But in his face his lady's face is sweet,
  And through his lips her kissing lips are gone:
  God send him peace, and joy of such an one.
    This is the story of St. Dorothy.
  I will you of your mercy pray for me
  Because I wrote these sayings for your grace,
  That I may one day see her in the face.




THE TWO DREAMS

(FROM BOCCACCIO)


  I will that if I say a heavy thing
  Your tongues forgive me; seeing ye know that spring
  Has flecks and fits of pain to keep her sweet,
  And walks somewhile with winter-bitten feet.
  Moreover it sounds often well to let
  One string, when ye play music, keep at fret
  The whole song through; one petal that is dead
  Confirms the roses, be they white or red;
  Dead sorrow is not sorrowful to hear
  As the thick noise that breaks mid weeping were;
  The sick sound aching in a lifted throat
  Turns to sharp silver of a perfect note;
  And though the rain falls often, and with rain
  Late autumn falls on the old red leaves like pain,
  I deem that God is not disquieted.
  Also while men are fed with wine and bread,
  They shall be fed with sorrow at his hand.
    There grew a rose-garden in Florence land
  More fair than many; all red summers through
  The leaves smelt sweet and sharp of rain, and blew
  Sideways with tender wind; and therein fell
  Sweet sound wherewith the green waxed audible,
  As a bird's will to sing disturbed his throat
  And set the sharp wings forward like a boat
  Pushed through soft water, moving his brown side
  Smooth-shapen as a maid's, and shook with pride
  His deep warm bosom, till the heavy sun's
  Set face of heat stopped all the songs at once.
  The ways were clean to walk and delicate;
  And when the windy white of March grew late,
  Before the trees took heart to face the sun
  With ravelled raiment of lean winter on,
  The roots were thick and hot with hollow grass.
    Some roods away a lordly house there was,
  Cool with broad courts and latticed passage wet
  From rush-flowers and lilies ripe to set,
  Sown close among the strewings of the floor;
  And either wall of the slow corridor
  Was dim with deep device of gracious things;
  Some angel's steady mouth and weight of wings
  Shut to the side; or Peter with straight stole
  And beard cut black against the aureole
  That spanned his head from nape to crown; thereby
  Mary's gold hair, thick to the girdle-tie
  Wherein was bound a child with tender feet;
  Or the broad cross with blood nigh brown on it.
    Within this house a righteous lord abode,
  Ser Averardo; patient of his mood,
  And just of judgment; and to child he had
  A maid so sweet that her mere sight made glad
  Men sorrowing, and unbound the brows of hate;
  And where she came, the lips that pain made strait
  Waxed warm and wide, and from untender grew
  Tender as those that sleep brings patience to.
  Such long locks had she, that with knee to chin
  She might have wrapped and warmed her feet therein.
  Right seldom fell her face on weeping wise;
  Gold hair she had, and golden-coloured eyes,
  Filled with clear light and fire and large repose
  Like a fair hound's; no man there is but knows
  Her face was white, and thereto she was tall;
  In no wise lacked there any praise at all
  To her most perfect and pure maidenhood;
  No sin I think there was in all her blood.
    She, where a gold grate shut the roses in,
  Dwelt daily through deep summer weeks, through green
  Flushed hours of rain upon the leaves; and there
  Love made him room and space to worship her
  With tender worship of bowed knees, and wrought
  Such pleasure as the pained sense palates not
  For weariness, but at one taste undoes
  The heart of its strong sweet, is ravenous
  Of all the hidden honey; words and sense
  Fail through the tune's imperious prevalence.
    In a poor house this lover kept apart,
  Long communing with patience next his heart
  If love of his might move that face at all,
  Tuned evenwise with colours musical;
  Then after length of days he said thus: "Love,
  For love's own sake and for the love thereof
  Let no harsh words untune your gracious mood;
  For good it were, if anything be good,
  To comfort me in this pain's plague of mine;
  Seeing thus, how neither sleep nor bread nor wine
  Seems pleasant to me, yea no thing that is
  Seems pleasant to me; only I know this,
  Love's ways are sharp for palms of piteous feet
  To travel, but the end of such is sweet:
  Now do with me as seemeth you the best."
  She mused a little, as one holds his guest
  By the hand musing, with her face borne down:
  Then said: "Yea, though such bitter seed be sown,
  Have no more care of all that you have said;
  Since if there is no sleep will bind your head,
  Lo, I am fain to help you certainly;
  Christ knoweth, sir, if I would have you die;
  There is no pleasure when a man is dead."
  Thereat he kissed her hands and yellow head
  And clipped her fair long body many times;
  I have no wit to shape in written rhymes
  A scanted tithe of this great joy they had.
    They were too near love's secret to be glad;
  As whoso deems the core will surely melt
  From the warm fruit his lips caress, hath felt
  Some bitter kernel where the teeth shut hard:
  Or as sweet music sharpens afterward,
  Being half disrelished both for sharp and sweet;
  As sea-water, having killed over-heat
  In a man's body, chills it with faint ache;
  So their sense, burdened only for love's sake,
  Failed for pure love; yet so time served their wit,
  They saved each day some gold reserves of it,
  Being wiser in love's riddle than such be
  Whom fragments feed with his chance charity.
  All things felt sweet were felt sweet overmuch;
  The rose-thorn's prickle dangerous to touch,
  And flecks of fire in the thin leaf-shadows;
  Too keen the breathed honey of the rose,
  Its red too harsh a weight on feasted eyes;
  They were so far gone in love's histories,
  Beyond all shape and colour and mere breath,
  Where pleasure has for kinsfolk sleep and death,
  And strength of soul and body waxen blind
  For weariness, and flesh entailed with mind,
  When the keen edge of sense foretasteth sin.
    Even this green place the summer caught them in
  Seemed half deflowered and sick with beaten leaves
  In their strayed eyes; these gold flower-fumèd eves
  Burnt out to make the sun's love-offering,
  The midnoon's prayer, the rose's thanksgiving,
  The trees' weight burdening the strengthless air,
  The shape of her stilled eyes, her coloured hair,
  Her body's balance from the moving feet--
  All this, found fair, lacked yet one grain of sweet
  It had some warm weeks back: so perisheth
  On May's new lip the tender April breath:
  So those same walks the wind sowed lilies in
  All April through, and all their latter kin
  Of languid leaves whereon the Autumn blows--
  The dead red raiment of the last year's rose--
  The last year's laurel, and the last year's love,
  Fade, and grow things that death grows weary of.
    What man will gather in red summer-time
  The fruit of some obscure and hoary rhyme
  Heard last midwinter, taste the heart in it,
  Mould the smooth semitones afresh, refit
  The fair limbs ruined, flush the dead blood through
  With colour, make all broken beauties new
  For love's new lesson--shall not such find pain
  When the marred music labouring in his brain
  Frets him with sweet sharp fragments, and lets slip
  One word that might leave satisfied his lip--
  One touch that might put fire in all the chords?
  This was her pain: to miss from all sweet words
  Some taste of sound, diverse and delicate--
  Some speech the old love found out to compensate
  For seasons of shut lips and drowsiness--
  Some grace, some word the old love found out to bless
  Passionless months and undelighted weeks.
  The flowers had lost their summer-scented cheeks,
  Their lips were no more sweet than daily breath:
  The year was plagued with instances of death.
    So fell it, these were sitting in cool grass
  With leaves about, and many a bird there was
  Where the green shadow thickliest impleached
  Soft fruit and writhen spray and blossom bleached
  Dry in the sun or washed with rains to white:
  Her girdle was pure silk, the bosom bright
  With purple as purple water and gold wrought in.
  One branch had touched with dusk her lips and chin,
  Made violet of the throat, abashed with shade
  The breast's bright plaited work: but nothing frayed
  The sun's large kiss on the luxurious hair.
  Her beauty was new colour to the air
  And music to the silent many birds.
  Love was an-hungred for some perfect words
  To praise her with; but only her low name
  "Andrevuola" came thrice, and thrice put shame
  In her clear cheek, so fruitful with new red
  That for pure love straightway shame's self was dead.
    Then with lids gathered as who late had wept
  She began saying: "I have so little slept
  My lids drowse now against the very sun;
  Yea, the brain aching with a dream begun
  Beats like a fitful blood; kiss but both brows,
  And you shall pluck my thoughts grown dangerous
  Almost away." He said thus, kissing them:
  "O sole sweet thing that God is glad to name,
  My one gold gift, if dreams be sharp and sore
  Shall not the waking time increase much more
  With taste and sound, sweet eyesight or sweet scent?
  Has any heat too hard and insolent
  Burnt bare the tender married leaves, undone
  The maiden grass shut under from the sun?
  Where in this world is room enough for pain?"
    The feverish finger of love had touched again
  Her lips with happier blood; the pain lay meek
  In her fair face, nor altered lip nor cheek
  With pallor or with pulse; but in her mouth
  Love thirsted as a man wayfaring doth,
  Making it humble as weak hunger is.
  She lay close to him, bade do this and this,
  Say that, sing thus: then almost weeping-ripe
  Crouched, then laughed low. As one that fain would wipe
  The old record out of old things done and dead,
  She rose, she heaved her hands up, and waxed red
  For wilful heart and blameless fear of blame;
  Saying "Though my wits be weak, this is no shame
  For a poor maid whom love so punisheth
  With heats of hesitation and stopped breath
  That with my dreams I live yet heavily
  For pure sad heart and faith's humility.
  Now be not wroth and I will show you this.
    "Methought our lips upon their second kiss
  Met in this place, and a fair day we had
  And fair soft leaves that waxed and were not sad
  With shaken rain or bitten through with drouth;
  When I, beholding ever how your mouth
  Waited for mine, the throat being fallen back,
  Saw crawl thereout a live thing flaked with black
  Specks of brute slime and leper-coloured scale,
  A devil's hide with foul flame-writhen grail
  Fashioned where hell's heat festers loathsomest;
  And that brief speech may ease me of the rest,
  Thus were you slain and eaten of the thing.
  My waked eyes felt the new day shuddering
  On their low lids, felt the whole east so beat,
  Pant with close pulse of such a plague-struck heat,
  As if the palpitating dawn drew breath
  For horror, breathing between life and death,
  Till the sun sprang blood-bright and violent."
    So finishing, her soft strength wholly spent,
  She gazed each way, lest some brute-hoovèd thing,
  The timeless travail of hell's childbearing,
  Should threat upon the sudden: whereat he,
  For relish of her tasted misery
  And tender little thornprick of her pain,
  Laughed with mere love. What lover among men
  But hath his sense fed sovereignly 'twixt whiles
  With tears and covered eyelids and sick smiles
  And soft disaster of a painèd face?
  What pain, established in so sweet a place,
  But the plucked leaf of it smells fragrantly?
  What colour burning man's wide-open eye
  But may be pleasurably seen? what sense
  Keeps in its hot sharp extreme violence
  No savour of sweet things? The bereaved blood
  And emptied flesh in their most broken mood
  Fail not so wholly, famish not when thus
  Past honey keeps the starved lip covetous.
    Therefore this speech from a glad mouth began,
  Breathed in her tender hair and temples wan
  Like one prolonged kiss while the lips had breath.
  "Sleep, that abides in vassalage of death
  And in death's service wears out half his age,
  Hath his dreams full of deadly vassalage,
  Shadow and sound of things ungracious;
  Fair shallow faces, hooded bloodless brows,
  And mouths past kissing; yea, myself have had
  As harsh a dream as holds your eyelids sad.
    "This dream I tell you came three nights ago;
  In full mid sleep I took a whim to know
  How sweet things might be; so I turned and thought;
  But save my dream all sweet availed me not.
  First came a smell of pounded spice and scent
  Such as God ripens in some continent
  Of utmost amber in the Syrian sea;
  And breaths as though some costly rose could be
  Spoiled slowly, wasted by some bitter fire
  To burn the sweet out leaf by leaf, and tire
  The flower's poor heart with heat and waste, to make
  Strong magic for some perfumed woman's sake.
  Then a cool naked sense beneath my feet
  Of bud and blossom; and sound of veins that beat
  As if a lute should play of its own heart
  And fearfully, not smitten of either part;
  And all my blood it filled with sharp and sweet
  As gold swoln grain fills out the huskèd wheat;
  So I rose naked from the bed, and stood
  Counting the mobile measure in my blood
  Some pleasant while, and through each limb there came
  Swift little pleasures pungent as a flame,
  Felt in the thrilling flesh and veins as much
  As the outer curls that feel the comb's first touch
  Thrill to the roots and shiver as from fire;
  And blind between my dream and my desire
  I seemed to stand and held my spirit still
  Lest this should cease. A child whose fingers spill
  Honey from cells forgotten of the bee
  Is less afraid to stir the hive and see
  Some wasp's bright back inside, than I to feel
  Some finger-touch disturb the flesh like steel.
  I prayed thus; Let me catch a secret here
  So sweet, it sharpens the sweet taste of fear
  And takes the mouth with edge of wine; I would
  Have here some colour and smooth shape as good
  As those in heaven whom the chief garden hides
  With low grape-blossom veiling their white sides
  And lesser tendrils that so bind and blind
  Their eyes and feet, that if one come behind
  To touch their hair they see not, neither fly;
  This would I see in heaven and not die.
  So praying, I had nigh cried out and knelt,
  So wholly my prayer filled me: till I felt
  In the dumb night's warm weight of glowing gloom
  Somewhat that altered all my sleeping-room,
  And made it like a green low place wherein
  Maids mix to bathe: one sets her small warm chin
  Against a ripple, that the angry pearl
  May flow like flame about her: the next curl
  Dips in some eddy coloured of the sun
  To wash the dust well out; another one
  Holds a straight ankle in her hand and swings
  With lavish body sidelong, so that rings
  Of sweet fierce water, swollen and splendid, fail
  All round her fine and floated body pale,
  Swayed flower-fashion, and her balanced side
  Swerved edgeways lets the weight of water slide,
  As taken in some underflow of sea
  Swerves the banked gold of sea-flowers; but she
  Pulls down some branch to keep her perfect head
  Clear of the river: even from wall to bed,
  I tell you, was my room transfigured so.
  Sweet, green and warm it was, nor could one know
  If there were walls or leaves, or if there was
  No bed's green curtain, but mere gentle grass.
  There were set also hard against the feet
  Gold plates with honey and green grapes to eat,
  With the cool water's noise to hear in rhymes:
  And a wind warmed me full of furze and limes
  And all hot sweets the heavy summer fills
  To the round brim of smooth cup-shapen hills.
  Next the grave walking of a woman's feet
  Made my veins hesitate, and gracious heat
  Made thick the lids and leaden on mine eyes:
  And I thought ever, surely it were wise
  Not yet to see her: this may last (who knows?)
  Five minutes; the poor rose is twice a rose
  Because it turns a face to her, the wind
  Sings that way; hath this woman ever sinned,
  I wonder? as a boy with apple-rind,
  I played with pleasures, made them to my mind,
  Changed each ere tasting. When she came indeed,
  First her hair touched me, then I grew to feed
  On the sense of her hand; her mouth at last
  Touched me between the cheek and lip and past
  Over my face with kisses here and there
  Sown in and out across the eyes and hair.
  Still I said nothing; till she set her face
  More close and harder on the kissing-place,
  And her mouth caught like a snake's mouth, and stung
  So faint and tenderly, the fang scarce clung
  More than a bird's foot: yet a wound it grew,
  A great one, let this red mark witness you
  Under the left breast; and the stroke thereof
  So clove my sense that I woke out of love
  And knew not what this dream was nor had wit;
  But now God knows if I have skill of it."
    Hereat she laid one palm against her lips
  To stop their trembling; as when water slips
  Out of a beak-mouthed vessel with faint noise
  And chuckles in the narrowed throat and cloys
  The carven rims with murmuring, so came
  Words in her lips with no word right of them,
  A beaten speech thick and disconsolate,
  Till his smile ceasing waxed compassionate
  Of her sore fear that grew from anything--
  The sound of the strong summer thickening
  In heated leaves of the smooth apple-trees:
  The day's breath felt about the ash-branches,
  And noises of the noon whose weight still grew
  On the hot heavy-headed flowers, and drew
  Their red mouths open till the rose-heart ached;
  For eastward all the crowding rose was slaked
  And soothed with shade: but westward all its growth
  Seemed to breathe hard with heat as a man doth
  Who feels his temples newly feverous.
  And even with such motion in her brows
  As that man hath in whom sick days begin,
  She turned her throat and spake, her voice being thin
  As a sick man's, sudden and tremulous;
  "Sweet, if this end be come indeed on us,
  Let us love more;" and held his mouth with hers.
  As the first sound of flooded hill-waters
  Is heard by people of the meadow-grass,
  Or ever a wandering waif of ruin pass
  With whirling stones and foam of the brown stream
  Flaked with fierce yellow: so beholding him
  She felt before tears came her eyelids wet,
  Saw the face deadly thin where life was yet,
  Heard his throat's harsh last moan before it clomb:
  And he, with close mouth passionate and dumb,
  Burned at her lips: so lay they without speech,
  Each grasping other, and the eyes of each
  Fed in the other's face: till suddenly
  He cried out with a little broken cry
  This word, "O help me, sweet, I am but dead."
  And even so saying, the colour of fair red
  Was gone out of his face, and his blood's beat
  Fell, and stark death made sharp his upward feet
  And pointed hands; and without moan he died.
  Pain smote her sudden in the brows and side,
  Strained her lips open and made burn her eyes:
  For the pure sharpness of her miseries
  She had no heart's pain, but mere body's wrack;
  But at the last her beaten blood drew back
  Slowly upon her face, and her stunned brows
  Suddenly grown aware and piteous
  Gathered themselves, her eyes shone, her hard breath
  Came as though one nigh dead came back from death;
  Her lips throbbed, and life trembled through her hair.
    And in brief while she thought to bury there
  The dead man that her love might lie with him
  In a sweet bed under the rose-roots dim
  And soft earth round the branchèd apple-trees,
  Full of hushed heat and heavy with great ease,
  And no man entering divide him thence.
  Wherefore she bade one of her handmaidens
  To be her help to do upon this wise.
  And saying so the tears out of her eyes
  Fell without noise and comforted her heart:
  Yea, her great pain eased of the sorest part
  Began to soften in her sense of it.
  There under all the little branches sweet
  The place was shapen of his burial;
  They shed thereon no thing funereal,
  But coloured leaves of latter rose-blossom,
  Stems of soft grass, some withered red and some
  Fair and fresh-blooded; and spoil splendider
  Of marigold and great spent sunflower.
    And afterward she came back without word
  To her own house; two days went, and the third
  Went, and she showed her father of this thing.
  And for great grief of her soul's travailing
  He gave consent she should endure in peace
  Till her life's end; yea, till her time should cease,
  She should abide in fellowship of pain.
  And having lived a holy year or twain
  She died of pure waste heart and weariness.
  And for love's honour in her love's distress
  This word was written over her tomb's head;
  "Here dead she lieth, for whose sake Love is dead."




AHOLIBAH


  In the beginning God made thee
      A woman well to look upon,
  Thy tender body as a tree
      Whereon cool wind hath always blown
      Till the clean branches be well grown.

  There was none like thee in the land;
      The girls that were thy bondwomen
  Did bind thee with a purple band
      Upon thy forehead, that all men
      Should know thee for God's handmaiden.

  Strange raiment clad thee like a bride,
      With silk to wear on hands and feet
  And plates of gold on either side:
      Wine made thee glad, and thou didst eat
      Honey, and choice of pleasant meat.

  And fishers in the middle sea
      Did get thee sea-fish and sea-weeds
  In colour like the robes on thee;
      And curious work of plaited reeds,
      And wools wherein live purple bleeds.

  And round the edges of thy cup
      Men wrought thee marvels out of gold,
  Strong snakes with lean throats lifted up,
      Large eyes whereon the brows had hold,
      And scaly things their slime kept cold.

  For thee they blew soft wind in flutes
      And ground sweet roots for cunning scent;
  Made slow because of many lutes,
      The wind among thy chambers went
      Wherein no light was violent.

  God called thy name Aholibah,
      His tabernacle being in thee,
  A witness through waste Asia;
      Thou wert a tent sewn cunningly
      With gold and colours of the sea.

  God gave thee gracious ministers
      And all their work who plait and weave:
  The cunning of embroiderers
      That sew the pillow to the sleeve,
      And likeness of all things that live.

  Thy garments upon thee were fair
      With scarlet and with yellow thread;
  Also the weaving of thine hair
      Was as fine gold upon thy head,
      And thy silk shoes were sewn with red.

  All sweet things he bade sift, and ground
      As a man grindeth wheat in mills
  With strong wheels alway going round;
      He gave thee corn, and grass that fills
      The cattle on a thousand hills.

  The wine of many seasons fed
      Thy mouth, and made it fair and clean;
  Sweet oil was poured out on thy head
      And ran down like cool rain between
      The strait close locks it melted in.

  The strong men and the captains knew
      Thy chambers wrought and fashioned
  With gold and covering of blue,
      And the blue raiment of thine head
      Who satest on a stately bed.

  All these had on their garments wrought
      The shape of beasts and creeping things,
  The body that availeth not,
      Flat backs of worms and veinèd wings,
      And the lewd bulk that sleeps and stings.

  Also the chosen of the years,
      The multitude being at ease,
  With sackbuts and with dulcimers
      And noise of shawms and psalteries
      Made mirth within the ears of these.

  But as a common woman doth,
      Thou didst think evil and devise;
  The sweet smell of thy breast and mouth
      Thou madest as the harlot's wise,
      And there was painting on thine eyes.

  Yea, in the woven guest-chamber
      And by the painted passages
  Where the strange gracious paintings were,
      State upon state of companies,
      There came on thee the lust of these.

  Because of shapes on either wall
      Sea-coloured from some rare blue shell
  At many a Tyrian interval,
      Horsemen on horses, girdled well,
      Delicate and desirable,

  Thou saidest: I am sick of love:
      Stay me with flagons, comfort me
  With apples for my pain thereof
      Till my hands gather in his tree
      That fruit wherein my lips would be.

  Yea, saidest thou, I will go up
      When there is no more shade than one
  May cover with a hollow cup,
      And make my bed against the sun
      Till my blood's violence be done.

  Thy mouth was leant upon the wall
      Against the painted mouth, thy chin
  Touched the hair's painted curve and fall;
      Thy deep throat, fallen lax and thin,
      Worked as the blood's beat worked therein.

  Therefore, O thou Aholibah,
      God is not glad because of thee;
  And thy fine gold shall pass away
      Like those fair coins of ore that be
      Washed over by the middle sea.

  Then will one make thy body bare
      To strip it of all gracious things,
  And pluck the cover from thine hair,
      And break the gift of many kings,
      Thy wrist-rings and thine ankle-rings.

  Likewise the man whose body joins
      To thy smooth body, as was said,
  Who hath a girdle on his loins
      And dyed attire upon his head--
      The same who, seeing, worshipped,

  Because thy face was like the face
      Of a clean maiden that smells sweet,
  Because thy gait was as the pace
      Of one that opens not her feet
      And is not heard within the street--

  Even he, O thou Aholibah,
      Made separate from thy desire,
  Shall cut thy nose and ears away
      And bruise thee for thy body's hire
      And burn the residue with fire.

  Then shall the heathen people say,
      The multitude being at ease;
  Lo, this is that Aholibah
      Whose name was blown among strange seas.
      Grown old with soft adulteries.

  Also her bed was made of green,
      Her windows beautiful for glass
  That she had made her bed between:
      Yea, for pure lust her body was
      Made like white summer-coloured grass.

  Her raiment was a strong man's spoil;
      Upon a table by a bed
  She set mine incense and mine oil
      To be the beauty of her head
      In chambers walled about with red.

  Also between the walls she had
      Fair faces of strong men portrayed;
  All girded round the loins, and clad
      With several cloths of woven braid
      And garments marvellously made.

  Therefore the wrath of God shall be
      Set as a watch upon her way;
  And whoso findeth by the sea
      Blown dust of bones will hardly say
      If this were that Aholibah.




LOVE AND SLEEP


  Lying asleep between the strokes of night
    I saw my love lean over my sad bed,
    Pale as the duskiest lily's leaf or head,
  Smooth-skinned and dark, with bare throat made to bite,
  Too wan for blushing and too warm for white,
    But perfect-coloured without white or red.
    And her lips opened amorously, and said--
  I wist not what, saving one word--Delight.
  And all her face was honey to my mouth,
    And all her body pasture to mine eyes;
      The long lithe arms and hotter hands than fire,
  The quivering flanks, hair smelling of the south,
    The bright light feet, the splendid supple thighs
      And glittering eyelids of my soul's desire.




MADONNA MIA


  Under green apple-boughs
  That never a storm will rouse,
  My lady hath her house
    Between two bowers;
  In either of the twain
  Red roses full of rain;
  She hath for bondwomen
    All kind of flowers.

  She hath no handmaid fair
  To draw her curled gold hair
  Through rings of gold that bear
    Her whole hair's weight;
  She hath no maids to stand
  Gold-clothed on either hand;
  In all the great green land
    None is so great.

  She hath no more to wear
  But one white hood of vair
  Drawn over eyes and hair,
    Wrought with strange gold,
  Made for some great queen's head,
  Some fair great queen since dead;
  And one strait gown of red
    Against the cold.

  Beneath her eyelids deep
  Love lying seems asleep,
  Love, swift to wake, to weep,
    To laugh, to gaze;
  Her breasts are like white birds,
  And all her gracious words
  As water-grass to herds
    In the June-days.

  To her all dews that fall
  And rains are musical;
  Her flowers are fed from all,
    Her joy from these;
  In the deep-feathered firs
  Their gift of joy is hers,
  In the least breath that stirs
    Across the trees.

  She grows with greenest leaves,
  Ripens with reddest sheaves,
  Forgets, remembers, grieves,
    And is not sad;
  The quiet lands and skies
  Leave light upon her eyes;
  None knows her, weak or wise,
    Or tired or glad.

  None knows, none understands,
  What flowers are like her hands;
  Though you should search all lands
    Wherein time grows,
  What snows are like her feet,
  Though his eyes burn with heat
  Through gazing on my sweet,
    Yet no man knows.

  Only this thing is said;
  That white and gold and red,
  God's three chief words, man's bread
    And oil and wine,
  Were given her for dowers,
  And kingdom of all hours,
  And grace of goodly flowers
    And various vine.

  This is my lady's praise:
  God after many days
  Wrought her in unknown ways,
    In sunset lands;
  This was my lady's birth;
  God gave her might and mirth
  And laid his whole sweet earth
    Between her hands.

  Under deep apple-boughs
  My lady hath her house;
  She wears upon her brows
    The flower thereof;
  All saying but what God saith
  To her is as vain breath;
  She is more strong than death,
    Being strong as love.




THE KING'S DAUGHTER


  We were ten maidens in the green corn,
    Small red leaves in the mill-water:
  Fairer maidens never were born,
    Apples of gold for the king's daughter.

  We were ten maidens by a well-head,
    Small white birds in the mill-water:
  Sweeter maidens never were wed,
    Rings of red for the king's daughter.

  The first to spin, the second to sing,
    Seeds of wheat in the mill-water;
  The third may was a goodly thing,
    White bread and brown for the king's daughter.

  The fourth to sew and the fifth to play,
    Fair green weed in the mill-water;
  The sixth may was a goodly may,
    White wine and red for the king's daughter.

  The seventh to woo, the eighth to wed,
    Fair thin reeds in the mill-water;
  The ninth had gold work on her head,
    Honey in the comb for the king's daughter.

  The ninth had gold work round her hair,
    Fallen flowers in the mill-water;
  The tenth may was goodly and fair,
    Golden gloves for the king's daughter.

  We were ten maidens in a field green,
    Fallen fruit in the mill-water;
  Fairer maidens never have been,
    Golden sleeves for the king's daughter.

  By there comes the king's young son,
    A little wind in the mill-water;
  "Out of ten maidens ye'll grant me one,"
    A crown of red for the king's daughter.

  "Out of ten mays ye'll give me the best,"
    A little rain in the mill-water;
  A bed of yellow straw for all the rest,
    A bed of gold for the king's daughter.

  He's ta'en out the goodliest,
    Rain that rains in the mill-water;
  A comb of yellow shell for all the rest,
    A comb of gold for the king's daughter.

  He's made her bed to the goodliest,
    Wind and hail in the mill-water;
  A grass girdle for all the rest,
    A girdle of arms for the king's daughter.

  He's set his heart to the goodliest,
    Snow that snows in the mill-water;
  Nine little kisses for all the rest,
    An hundredfold for the king's daughter.

  He's ta'en his leave at the goodliest,
    Broken boats in the mill-water;
  Golden gifts for all the rest,
    Sorrow of heart for the king's daughter.

  "Ye'll make a grave for my fair body,"
    Running rain in the mill-water;
  "And ye'll streek my brother at the side of me,"
    The pains of hell for the king's daughter.




AFTER DEATH


  The four boards of the coffin lid
  Heard all the dead man did.

  The first curse was in his mouth,
  Made of grave's mould and deadly drouth.

  The next curse was in his head,
  Made of God's work discomfited.

  The next curse was in his hands,
  Made out of two grave-bands.

  The next curse was in his feet,
  Made out of a grave-sheet.

  "I had fair coins red and white,
  And my name was as great light;

  I had fair clothes green and red,
  And strong gold bound round my head.

  But no meat comes in my mouth,
  Now I fare as the worm doth;

  And no gold binds in my hair,
  Now I fare as the blind fare.

  My live thews were of great strength,
  Now am I waxen a span's length;

  My live sides were full of lust,
  Now are they dried with dust."

  The first board spake and said:
  "Is it best eating flesh or bread?"

  The second answered it:
  "Is wine or honey the more sweet?"

  The third board spake and said:
  "Is red gold worth a girl's gold head?"

  The fourth made answer thus:
  "All these things are as one with us."

  The dead man asked of them:
  "Is the green land stained brown with flame?

  Have they hewn my son for beasts to eat,
  And my wife's body for beasts' meat?

  Have they boiled my maid in a brass pan,
  And built a gallows to hang my man?"

  The boards said to him:
  "This is a lewd thing that ye deem.

  Your wife has gotten a golden bed,
  All the sheets are sewn with red.

  Your son has gotten a coat of silk,
  The sleeves are soft as curded milk.

  Your maid has gotten a kirtle new,
  All the skirt has braids of blue.

  Your man has gotten both ring and glove,
  Wrought well for eyes to love."

  The dead man answered thus:
  "What good gift shall God give us?"

  The boards answered him anon:
  "Flesh to feed hell's worm upon."




MAY JANET

(BRETON)


  "Stand up, stand up, thou May Janet,
    And go to the wars with me."
  He's drawn her by both hands
    With her face against the sea.

  "He that strews red shall gather white,
    He that sows white reap red,
  Before your face and my daughter's
    Meet in a marriage-bed.

  "Gold coin shall grow in the yellow field,
    Green corn in the green sea-water,
  And red fruit grow of the rose's red,
    Ere your fruit grow in her."

  "But I shall have her by land," he said,
    "Or I shall have her by sea,
  Or I shall have her by strong treason
    And no grace go with me."

  Her father's drawn her by both hands,
    He's rent her gown from her,
  He's ta'en the smock round her body,
    Cast in the sea-water.

  The captain's drawn her by both sides
    Out of the fair green sea;
  "Stand up, stand up, thou May Janet,
    And come to the war with me."

  The first town they came to
    There was a blue bride-chamber;
  He clothed her on with silk
    And belted her with amber.

  The second town they came to
    The bridesmen feasted knee to knee;
  He clothed her on with silver,
    A stately thing to see.

  The third town they came to
    The bridesmaids all had gowns of gold;
  He clothed her on with purple,
    A rich thing to behold.

  The last town they came to
    He clothed her white and red,
  With a green flag either side of her
    And a gold flag overhead.




THE BLOODY SON

(FINNISH)


  "O where have ye been the morn sae late,
    My merry son, come tell me hither?
  O where have ye been the morn sae late?
    And I wot I hae not anither."
  "By the water-gate, by the water-gate,
    O dear mither."

  "And whatten kin' o' wark had ye there to make,
    My merry son, come tell me hither?
  And whatten kin' o' wark had ye there to make?
    And I wot I hae not anither."
  "I watered my steeds with water frae the lake,
    O dear mither."

  "Why is your coat sae fouled the day,
    My merry son, come tell me hither?
  Why is your coat sae fouled the day?
    And I wot I hae not anither."
  "The steeds were stamping sair by the weary banks of clay,
    O dear mither."

  "And where gat ye thae sleeves of red,
    My merry son, come tell me hither?
  And where gat ye thae sleeves of red?
    And I wot I hae not anither."
  "I have slain my ae brither by the weary waterhead,
    O dear mither."

  "And where will ye gang to mak your mend,
    My merry son, come tell me hither?
  And where will ye gang to mak your mend?
    And I wot I hae not anither."
  "The warldis way, to the warldis end,
    O dear mither."

  "And what will ye leave your father dear,
    My merry son, come tell me hither?
  And what will ye leave your father dear?
    And I wot I hae not anither."
  "The wood to fell and the logs to bear,
  For he'll never see my body mair,
    O dear mither."

  "And what will ye leave your mither dear,
    My merry son, come tell me hither?
  And what will ye leave your mither dear?
    And I wot I hae not anither."
  "The wool to card and the wool to wear,
  For ye'll never see my body mair,
    O dear mither."

  "And what will ye leave for your wife to take,
    My merry son, come tell me hither?
  And what will ye leave for your wife to take?
    And I wot I hae not anither."
  "A goodly gown and a fair new make,
  For she'll do nae mair for my body's sake,
    O dear mither."

  "And what will ye leave your young son fair,
    My merry son, come tell me hither?
  And what will ye leave your young son fair?
    And I wot ye hae not anither."
  "A twiggen school-rod for his body to bear,
  Though it garred him greet he'll get nae mair,
    O dear mither."

  "And what will ye leave your little daughter sweet,
    My merry son, come tell me hither?
  And what will ye leave your little daughter sweet?
    And I wot ye hae not anither."
  "Wild mulberries for her mouth to eat,
  She'll get nae mair though it garred her greet,
    O dear mither."

  "And when will ye come back frae roamin',
    My merry son, come tell me hither?
  And when will ye come back frae roamin'?
    And I wot I hae not anither."
  "When the sunrise out of the north is comen,
    O dear mither."

  "When shall the sunrise on the north side be,
    My merry son, come tell me hither?
  When shall the sunrise on the north side be?
    And I wot I hae not anither."
  "When chuckie-stanes shall swim in the sea,
    O dear mither."

  "When shall stanes in the sea swim,
    My merry son, come tell me hither?
  When shall stanes in the sea swim?
    And I wot I hae not anither."
  "When birdies' feathers are as lead therein,
    O dear mither."

  "When shall feathers be as lead,
    My merry son, come tell me hither?
  When shall feathers be as lead?
    And I wot I hae not anither."
  "When God shall judge between the quick and dead,
    O dear mither."




THE SEA-SWALLOWS


  This fell when Christmas lights were done,
    (Red rose leaves will never make wine)
  But before the Easter lights begun;
    The ways are sair fra' the Till to the Tyne.

  Two lovers sat where the rowan blows
    And all the grass is heavy and fine,
  By the gathering-place of the sea-swallows
    When the wind brings them over Tyne.

  Blossom of broom will never make bread,
    Red rose leaves will never make wine;
  Between her brows she is grown red,
    That was full white in the fields by Tyne.

  "O what is this thing ye have on,
    Show me now, sweet daughter of mine?"
  "O father, this is my little son
    That I found hid in the sides of Tyne.

  "O what will ye give my son to eat,
    Red rose leaves will never make wine?"
  "Fen-water and adder's meat."
    The ways are sair fra' the Till to the Tyne.

  "Or what will ye get my son to wear?"
    (Red rose leaves will never make wine.)
  "A weed and a web of nettle's hair."
    The ways are sair fra' the Till to the Tyne.

  "Or what will ye take to line his bed?"
    (Red rose leaves will never make wine.)
  "Two black stones at the kirkwall's head."
    The ways are sair fra' the Till to the Tyne.

  "Or what will ye give my son for land?"
    (Red rose leaves will never make wine.)
  "Three girl's paces of red sand."
    The ways are sair fra' the Till to the Tyne.

  "Or what will ye give me for my son?"
    (Red rose leaves will never make wine.)
  "Six times to kiss his young mouth on."
    The ways are sair fra' the Till to the Tyne.

  "But what have ye done with the bearing-bread,
    And what have ye made of the washing-wine?
  Or where have ye made your bearing-bed,
    To bear a son in the sides of Tyne?"

  "The bearing-bread is soft and new,
    There is no soil in the straining wine;
  The bed was made between green and blue,
    It stands full soft by the sides of Tyne.

  "The fair grass was my bearing-bread,
    The well-water my washing-wine;
  The low leaves were my bearing-bed,
    And that was best in the sides of Tyne."

  "O daughter, if ye have done this thing,
    I wot the greater grief is mine;
  This was a bitter child-bearing,
    When ye were got by the sides of Tyne.

  "About the time of sea-swallows
    That fly full thick by six and nine,
  Ye'll have my body out of the house,
    To bury me by the sides of Tyne.

  "Set nine stones by the wall for twain,"
    (Red rose leaves will never make wine)
  "For the bed I take will measure ten."
    The ways are sair fra' the Till to the Tyne.

  "Tread twelve girl's paces out for three,"
    (Red rose leaves will never make wine)
  "For the pit I made has taken me."
    The ways are sair fra' the Till to the Tyne.




THE YEAR OF LOVE


  There were four loves that one by one,
  Following the seasons and the sun,
  Passed over without tears, and fell
  Away without farewell.

  The first was made of gold and tears,
  The next of aspen-leaves and fears,
  The third of rose-boughs and rose-roots,
  The last love of strange fruits.

  These were the four loves faded. Hold
  Some minutes fast the time of gold
  When our lips each way clung and clove
  To a face full of love.

  The tears inside our eyelids met,
  Wrung forth with kissing, and wept wet
  The faces cleaving each to each
  Where the blood served for speech.

  The second, with low patient brows
  Bound under aspen-coloured boughs
  And eyes made strong and grave with sleep
  And yet too weak to weep--

  The third, with eager mouth at ease
  Fed from late autumn honey, lees
  Of scarce gold left in latter cells
  With scattered flower-smells--

  Hair sprinkled over with spoilt sweet
  Of ruined roses, wrists and feet
  Slight-swathed, as grassy-girdled sheaves
  Hold in stray poppy-leaves--

  The fourth, with lips whereon has bled
  Some great pale fruit's slow colour, shed
  From the rank bitter husk whence drips
  Faint blood between her lips--

  Made of the heat of whole great Junes
  Burning the blue dark round their moons
  (Each like a mown red marigold)
  So hard the flame keeps hold--

  These are burnt thoroughly away.
  Only the first holds out a day
  Beyond these latter loves that were
  Made of mere heat and air.

  And now the time is winterly
  The first love fades too: none will see,
  When April warms the world anew,
  The place wherein love grew.




DEDICATION

1865


  The sea gives her shells to the shingle,
    The earth gives her streams to the sea:
  They are many, but my gift is single,
    My verses, the firstfruits of me.
  Let the wind take the green and the grey leaf,
    Cast forth without fruit upon air;
  Take rose-leaf and vine-leaf and bay-leaf
    Blown loose from the hair.

  The night shakes them round me in legions,
    Dawn drives them before her like dreams;
  Time sheds them like snows on strange regions,
    Swept shoreward on infinite streams;
  Leaves pallid and sombre and ruddy,
    Dead fruits of the fugitive years;
  Some stained as with wine and made bloody,
    And some as with tears.

  Some scattered in seven years' traces,
    As they fell from the boy that was then;
  Long left among idle green places,
    Or gathered but now among men;
  On seas full of wonder and peril,
    Blown white round the capes of the north;
  Or in islands where myrtles are sterile
    And loves bring not forth.

  O daughters of dreams and of stories
    That life is not wearied of yet,
  Faustine, Fragoletta, Dolores,
    Félise and Yolande and Juliette,
  Shall I find you not still, shall I miss you,
    When sleep, that is true or that seems,
  Comes back to me hopeless to kiss you,
    O daughters of dreams?

  They are past as a slumber that passes,
    As the dew of a dawn of old time;
  More frail than the shadows on glasses,
    More fleet than a wave or a rhyme.
  As the waves after ebb drawing seaward,
    When their hollows are full of the night,
  So the birds that flew singing to me-ward
    Recede out of sight.

  The songs of dead seasons, that wander
    On wings of articulate words;
  Lost leaves that the shore-wind may squander,
    Light flocks of untameable birds;
  Some sang to me dreaming in class-time
    And truant in hand as in tongue;
  For the youngest were born of boy's pastime,
    The eldest are young.

  Is there shelter while life in them lingers,
    Is there hearing for songs that recede,
  Tunes touched from a harp with man's fingers
    Or blown with boy's mouth in a reed?
  Is there place in the land of your labour,
    Is there room in your world of delight,
  Where change has not sorrow for neighbour
    And day has not night?

  In their wings though the sea-wind yet quivers,
    Will you spare not a space for them there
  Made green with the running of rivers
    And gracious with temperate air;
  In the fields and the turreted cities,
    That cover from sunshine and rain
  Fair passions and bountiful pities
    And loves without stain?

  In a land of clear colours and stories,
    In a region of shadowless hours,
  Where earth has a garment of glories
    And a murmur of musical flowers;
  In woods where the spring half uncovers
    The flush of her amorous face,
  By the waters that listen for lovers,
    For these is there place?

  For the song-birds of sorrow, that muffle
    Their music as clouds do their fire:
  For the storm-birds of passion, that ruffle
    Wild wings in a wind of desire;
  In the stream of the storm as it settles
    Blown seaward, borne far from the sun,
  Shaken loose on the darkness like petals
    Dropt one after one?

  Though the world of your hands be more gracious
    And lovelier in lordship of things
  Clothed round by sweet art with the spacious
    Warm heaven of her imminent wings,
  Let them enter, unfledged and nigh fainting,
    For the love of old loves and lost times;
  And receive in your palace of painting
    This revel of rhymes.

  Though the seasons of man full of losses
    Make empty the years full of youth,
  If but one thing be constant in crosses,
    Change lays not her hand upon truth;
  Hopes die, and their tombs are for token
    That the grief as the joy of them ends
  Ere time that breaks all men has broken
    The faith between friends.

  Though the many lights dwindle to one light,
    There is help if the heaven has one;
  Though the skies be discrowned of the sunlight
    And the earth dispossessed of the sun,
  They have moonlight and sleep for repayment,
    When, refreshed as a bride and set free,
  With stars and sea-winds in her raiment,
    Night sinks on the sea.



  PRINTED AT THE COMPLETE PRESS
  WEST NORWOOD
  LONDON





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Poems & Ballads (First Series), by 
Algernon Charles Swinburne

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK POEMS & BALLADS (FIRST SERIES) ***

***** This file should be named 35402-8.txt or 35402-8.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/5/4/0/35402/

Produced by Paul Murray, Chandra Friend and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


ï»¿The Project Gutenberg eBook, Songs Before Sunrise, by Algernon Charles
Swinburne


This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions 
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at 
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.




Title: Songs Before Sunrise


Author: Algernon Charles Swinburne



Release Date: September 13, 2014  [eBook #4072]
[This file was first posted on 5 November 2001]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8


***START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SONGS BEFORE SUNRISE***


Transcribed from the 1917 William Heinemann edition by David Price, email
ccx074@pglaf.org





                           SONGS BEFORE SUNRISE


                                    By
                        Algernon Charles Swinburne

                                * * * * *

                   19 [Picture: Decorative graphic] 17

                                * * * * *

                        LONDON:  WILLIAM HEINEMANN

                                * * * * *

          _First published_ (_Ellis_), 1871.  _New impressions_
            (Chatto) 1874, â77, â80, â83, â88, â92, â99, 1903,
           â08, â11, â15.  _Also Florence Press Edition_, 1909

              _The Golden Pine Edition_ (_Heinemann_), 1917

        _Included in Collected Poems_ (_Chatto_), 1904 (_twice_),
                   â09, â10, â12.  (_Heinemann_), 1917

                                * * * * *

                   _London_: _William Heinemann_, 1917

                                * * * * *




DEDICATION


                                    TO
                              JOSEPH MAZZINI

   TAKE, since you bade it should bear,
      These, of the seed of your sowing,
         Blossom or berry or weed.
   Sweet though they be not, or fair,
      That the dew of your word kept growing,
         Sweet at least was the seed.

   Men bring you love-offerings of tears,
      And sorrow the kiss that assuages,
         And slaves the hate-offering of wrongs,
   And time the thanksgiving of years,
      And years the thanksgiving of ages;
         I bring you my handful of songs.

   If a perfume be left, if a bloom,
      Let it live till Italia be risen,
         To be strewn in the dust of her car
   When her voice shall awake from the tomb
      England, and France from her prison,
         Sisters, a star by a star.

   I bring you the sword of a song,
      The sword of my spiritâs desire,
         Feeble; but laid at your feet,
   That which was weak shall be strong,
      That which was cold shall take fire,
         That which was bitter be sweet.

   It was wrought not with hands to smite,
      Nor hewn after swordsmithsâ fashion,
         Nor tempered on anvil of steel;
   But with visions and dreams of the night,
      But with hope, and the patience of passion,
         And the signet of love for a seal.

   Be it witness, till one more strong,
      Till a loftier lyre, till a rarer
         Lute praise her better than I,
   Be it witness before you, my song,
      That I knew her, the worldâs banner-bearer,
         Who shall cry the republican cry.

   Yea, even she as at first,
      Yea, she alone and none other,
         Shall cast down, shall build up, shall bring home;
   Slake earthâs hunger and thirst,
      Lighten, and lead as a mother;
         First name of the worldâs names, Rome.




CONTENTS

           SONGS BEFORE SUNRISE
PRELUDE                                   3
THE EVE OF REVOLUTION                    10
A WATCH IN THE NIGHT                     27
SUPER FLUMINA BABYLONIS                  34
THE HALT BEFORE ROME                     40
MENTANA: FIRST ANNIVERSARY               52
BLESSED AMONG WOMEN                      56
THE LITANY OF NATIONS                    64
HERTHA                                   72
BEFORE A CRUCIFIX                        81
TENEBRÃ                                  88
HYMN OF MAN                              93
THE PILGRIMS                            105
ARMAND BARBÃS                           109
QUIA MULTUM AMAVIT                      111
GENESIS                                 117
TO WALT WHITMAN IN AMERICA              120
CHRISTMAS ANTIPHONES                    126
A NEW YEARâS MESSAGE                    137
MATER DOLOROSA                          140
MATER TRIUMPHALIS                       144
A MARCHING SONG                         151
SIENA                                   160
COR CORDIUM                             171
IN SAN LORENZO                          172
TIRESIAS                                173
THE SONG OF THE STANDARD                187
ON THE DOWNS                            191
MESSIDOR                                197
ODE ON THE INSURRECTION IN CANDIA       200
âNON DOLETâ                             209
EURYDICE                                210
AN APPEAL                               211
PERINDE AC CADAVER                      215
MONOTONES                               219
THE OBLATION                            221
A YEARâS BURDEN                         222
EPILOGUE                                226
NOTES                                   237




PRELUDE


   BETWEEN the green bud and the red
   Youth sat and sang by Time, and shed
      From eyes and tresses flowers and tears,
      From heart and spirit hopes and fears,
   Upon the hollow stream whose bed
      Is channelled by the foamless years;
   And with the white the gold-haired head
      Mixed running locks, and in Timeâs ears
   Youthâs dreams hung singing, and Timeâs truth
   Was half not harsh in the ears of Youth.

   Between the bud and the blown flower
   Youth talked with joy and grief an hour,
      With footless joy and wingless grief
      And twin-born faith and disbelief
   Who share the seasons to devour;
      And long ere these made up their sheaf
   Felt the winds round him shake and shower
      The rose-red and the blood-red leaf,
   Delight whose germ grew never grain,
   And passion dyed in its own pain.

   Then he stood up, and trod to dust
   Fear and desire, mistrust and trust,
      And dreams of bitter sleep and sweet,
      And bound for sandals on his feet
   Knowledge and patience of what must
      And what things may be, in the heat
   And cold of years that rot and rust
      And alter; and his spiritâs meat
   Was freedom, and his staff was wrought
   Of strength, and his cloak woven of thought.

   For what has he whose will sees clear
   To do with doubt and faith and fear,
      Swift hopes and slow despondencies?
      His heart is equal with the seaâs
   And with the sea-windâs, and his ear
      Is level to the speech of these,
   And his soul communes and takes cheer
      With the actual earthâs equalities,
   Air, light, and night, hills, winds, and streams,
   And seeks not strength from strengthless dreams.

   His soul is even with the sun
   Whose spirit and whose eye are one,
      Who seeks not stars by day, nor light
      And heavy heat of day by night.
   Him can no God cast down, whom none
      Can lift in hope beyond the height
   Of fate and nature and things done
      By the calm rule of might and right
   That bids men be and bear and do,
   And die beneath blind skies or blue.

   To him the lights of even and morn
   Speak no vain things of love or scorn,
      Fancies and passions miscreate
      By man in things dispassionate.
   Nor holds he fellowship forlorn
      With souls that pray and hope and hate,
   And doubt they had better not been born,
      And fain would lure or scare off fate
   And charm their doomsman from their doom
   And make fear dig its own false tomb.

   He builds not half of doubts and half
   Of dreams his own soulâs cenotaph,
      Whence hopes and fears with helpless eyes,
      Wrapt loose in cast-off cerecloths, rise
   And dance and wring their hands and laugh,
      And weep thin tears and sigh light sighs,
   And without living lips would quaff
      The living spring in man that lies,
   And drain his soul of faith and strength
   It might have lived on a lifeâs length.

   He hath given himself and hath not sold
   To God for heaven or man for gold,
      Or grief for comfort that it gives,
      Or joy for griefâs restoratives.
   He hath given himself to time, whose fold
      Shuts in the mortal flock that lives
   On its plain pastureâs heat and cold
      And the equal yearâs alternatives.
   Earth, heaven, and time, death, life, and he,
   Endure while they shall be to be.

   âYet between death and life are hours
   To flush with love and hide in flowers;
      What profit save in these?â men cry:
      âAh, see, between soft earth and sky,
   What only good things here are ours!â
      They say, âwhat better wouldst thou try,
   What sweeter sing of? or what powers
      Serve, that will give thee ere thou die
   More joy to sing and be less sad,
   More heart to play and grow more glad?â

   Play then and sing; we too have played,
   We likewise, in that subtle shade.
      We too have twisted through our hair
      Such tendrils as the wild Loves wear,
   And heard what mirth the MÃ¦nads made,
      Till the wind blew our garlands bare
   And left their roses disarrayed,
      And smote the summer with strange air,
   And disengirdled and discrowned
   The limbs and locks that vine-wreaths bound.

   We too have tracked by star-proof trees
   The tempest of the Thyiades
      Scare the loud night on hills that hid
      The blood-feasts of the Bassarid,
   Heard their songâs iron cadences
      Fright the wolf hungering from the kid,
   Outroar the lion-throated seas,
      Outchide the north-wind if it chid,
   And hush the torrent-tongued ravines
   With thunders of their tambourines.

   But the fierce flute whose notes acclaim
   Dim goddesses of fiery fame,
      Cymbal and clamorous kettledrum,
      Timbrels and tabrets, all are dumb
   That turned the high chill air to flame;
      The singing tongues of fire are numb
   That called on Cotys by her name
      Edonian, till they felt her come
   And maddened, and her mystic face
   Lightened along the streams of Thrace.

   For Pleasure slumberless and pale,
   And Passion with rejected veil,
      Pass, and the tempest-footed throng
      Of hours that follow them with song
   Till their feet flag and voices fail,
      And lips that were so loud so long
   Learn silence, or a wearier wail;
      So keen is change, and time so strong,
   To weave the robes of life and rend
   And weave again till life have end.

   But weak is change, but strengthless time,
   To take the light from heaven, or climb
      The hills of heaven with wasting feet.
      Songs they can stop that earth found meet,
   But the stars keep their ageless rhyme;
      Flowers they can slay that spring thought sweet,
   But the stars keep their spring sublime;
      Passions and pleasures can defeat,
   Actions and agonies control,
   And life and death, but not the soul.

   Because manâs soul is manâs God still,
   What wind soever waft his will
      Across the waves of day and night
      To port or shipwreck, left or right,
   By shores and shoals of good and ill;
      And still its flame at mainmast height
   Through the rent air that foam-flakes fill
      Sustains the indomitable light
   Whence only man hath strength to steer
   Or helm to handle without fear.

   Save his own soulâs light overhead,
   None leads him, and none ever led,
      Across birthâs hidden harbour-bar,
      Past youth where shoreward shallows are,
   Through age that drives on toward the red
      Vast void of sunset hailed from far,
   To the equal waters of the dead;
      Save his own soul he hath no star,
   And sinks, except his own soul guide,
   Helmless in middle turn of tide.

   No blast of air or fire of sun
   Puts out the light whereby we run
      With girded loins our lamplit race,
      And each from each takes heart of grace
   And spirit till his turn be done,
      And light of face from each manâs face
   In whom the light of trust is one;
      Since only souls that keep their place
   By their own light, and watch things roll,
   And stand, have light for any soul.

   A little time we gain from time
   To set our seasons in some chime,
      For harsh or sweet or loud or low,
      With seasons played out long ago
   And souls that in their time and prime
      Took part with summer or with snow,
   Lived abject lives out or sublime,
      And had their chance of seed to sow
   For service or disservice done
   To those days daed and this their son.

   A little time that we may fill
   Or with such good works or such ill
      As loose the bonds or make them strong
      Wherein all manhood suffers wrong.
   By rose-hung river and light-foot rill
      There are who rest not; who think long
   Till they discern as from a hill
      At the sunâs hour of morning song,
   Known of souls only, and those souls free,
   The sacred spaces of the sea.




THE EVE OF REVOLUTION


1


   THE trumpets of the four winds of the world
      From the ends of the earth blow battle; the night heaves,
   With breasts palpitating and wings refurled,
      With passion of couched limbs, as one who grieves
   Sleeping, and in her sleep she sees uncurled
      Dreams serpent-shapen, such as sickness weaves,
   Down the wild wind of vision caught and whirled,
      Dead leaves of sleep, thicker than autumn leaves,
            Shadows of storm-shaped things,
            Flights of dim tribes of kings,
      The reaping men that reap men for their sheaves,
            And, without grain to yield,
            Their scythe-swept harvest-field
      Thronged thick with men pursuing and fugitives,
         Dead foliage of the tree of sleep,
   Leaves blood-coloured and golden, blown from deep to deep.



2


   I hear the midnight on the mountains cry
      With many tongues of thunders, and I hear
   Sound and resound the hollow shield of sky
      With trumpet-throated winds that charge and cheer,
   And through the roar of the hours that fighting fly,
      Through flight and fight and all the fluctuant fear,
   A sound sublimer than the heavens are high,
      A voice more instant than the winds are clear,
            Say to my spirit, âTake
            Thy trumpet too, and make
      A rallying music in the void nightâs ear,
            Till the storm lose its track,
            And all the night go back;
      Till, as through sleep false life knows true life near,
         Thou know the morning through the night,
   And through the thunder silence, and through darkness light.â



3


   I set the trumpet to my lips and blow.
      The height of night is shaken, the skies break,
   The winds and stars and waters come and go
      By fits of breath and light and sound, that wake
   As out of sleep, and perish as the show
      Built up of sleep, when all her strengths forsake
   The sense-compelling spirit; the depths glow,
      The heights flash, and the roots and summits shake
            Of earth in all her mountains,
            And the inner foamless fountains
      And wellsprings of her fast-bound forces quake;
            Yea, the whole air of life
            Is set on fire of strife,
      Till change unmake things made and love remake;
         Reason and love, whose names are one,
   Seeing reason is the sunlight shed from love the sun.



4


   The night is broken eastward; is it day,
      Or but the watchfires trembling here and there,
   Like hopes on memoryâs devastated way,
      In moonless wastes of planet-stricken air?
   O many-childed mother great and grey,
      O multitudinous bosom, and breasts that bare
   Our fathersâ generations, whereat lay
      The weanling peoples and the tribes that were,
            Whose new-born mouths long dead
            Those ninefold nipples fed,
      Dim face with deathless eyes and withered hair,
            Fostress of obscure lands,
            Whose multiplying hands
      Wove the worldâs web with divers races fair
         And cast it waif-wise on the stream,
   The waters of the centuries, where thou satâst to dream;



5


   O many-minded mother and visionary,
      Asia, that sawest their westering waters sweep
   With all the ships and spoils of time to carry
      And all the fears and hopes of life to keep,
   Thy vesture wrought of ages legendary
      Hides usward thine impenetrable sleep,
   And thy veiled head, nightâs oldest tributary,
      We know not if it speak or smile or weep.
            But where for us began
            The first live light of man
      And first-born fire of deeds to burn and leap,
            The first war fair as peace
            To shine and lighten Greece,
      And the first freedom moved upon the deep,
         Godâs breath upon the face of time
   Moving, a present spirit, seen of men sublime;



6


   There where our east looks always to thy west,
      Our mornings to thine evenings, Greece to thee,
   These lights that catch the mountains crest by crest,
      Are they of stars or beacons that we see?
   Taygetus takes here the winds abreast,
      And there the sun resumes ThermopylÃ¦;
   The light is Athens where those remnants rest,
      And Salamis the sea-wall of that sea.
            The grass men tread upon
            Is very Marathon,
      The leaves are of that time-unstricken tree
            That storm nor sun can fret
            Nor wind, since she that set
      Made it her sign to men whose shield was she;
         Here, as dead time his deathless things,
   Eurotas and Cephisus keep their sleepless springs.



7


   O hills of Crete, are these things dead?  O waves,
      O many-mouthed streams, are these springs dry?
   Earth, dost thou feed and hide now none but slaves?
      Heaven, hast thou heard of men that would not die?
   Is the land thick with only such menâs graves
      As were ashamed to look upon the sky?
   Ye dead, whose name outfaces and outbraves
      Death, is the seed of such as you gone by?
            Sea, have thy ports not heard
            Some Marathonian word
      Rise up to landward and to Godward fly?
            No thunder, that the skies
            Sent not upon us, rise
      With fire and earthquake and a cleaving cry?
         Nay, light is here, and shall be light,
   Though all the face of the hour be overborne with night.



8


   I set the trumpet to my lips and blow.
      The night is broken northward; the pale plains
   And footless fields of sun-forgotten snow
      Feel through their creviced lips and iron veins
   Such quick breath labour and such clean blood flow
      As summer-stricken spring feels in her pains
   When dying May bears June, too young to know
      The fruit that waxes from the flower that wanes;
            Strange tyrannies and vast,
            Tribes frost-bound to their past,
      Lands that are loud all through their length with chains,
            Wastes where the windâs wings break,
            Displumed by daylong ache
      And anguish of blind snows and rack-blown rains,
         And ice that seals the White Seaâs lips,
   Whose monstrous weights crush flat the sides of shrieking ships;



9


   Horrible sights and sounds of the unreached pole,
      And shrill fierce climes of inconsolable air,
   Shining below the beamless aureole
      That hangs about the north-windâs hurtling hair,
   A comet-lighted lamp, sublime and sole
      Dawn of the dayless heaven where suns despair;
   Earth, skies, and waters, smitten into soul,
      Feel the hard veil that iron centuries wear
            Rent as with hands in sunder,
            Such hands as make the thunder
      And clothe with form all substance and strip bare;
            Shapes, shadows, sounds and lights
            Of their dead days and nights
      Take soul of life too keen for death to bear;
         Life, conscience, forethought, will, desire,
   Flood menâs inanimate eyes and dry-drawn hearts with fire.



10


   Light, light, and light! to break and melt in sunder
      All clouds and chains that in one bondage bind
   Eyes, hands, and spirits, forged by fear and wonder
      And sleek fierce fraud with hidden knife behind;
   There goes no fire from heaven before their thunder,
      Nor are the links not malleable that wind
   Round the snared limbs and souls that ache thereunder;
      The hands are mighty, were the head not blind.
            Priest is the staff of king,
            And chains and clouds one thing,
      And fettered flesh with devastated mind.
            Open thy soul to see,
            Slave, and thy feet are free;
      Thy bonds and thy beliefs are one in kind,
         And of thy fears thine irons wrought
   Hang weights upon thee fashioned out of thine own thought.



11


   O soul, O God, O glory of liberty,
      To night and day their lightning and their light!
   With heat of heart thou kindlest the quick sea,
      And the dead earth takes spirit from thy sight;
   The natural body of things is warm with thee,
      And the worldâs weakness parcel of thy might;
   Thou seest us feeble and forceless, fit to be
      Slaves of the years that drive us left and right,
            Drowned under hours like waves
            Wherethrough we row like slaves;
      But if thy finger touch us, these take flight.
            If but one sovereign word
            Of thy live lips be heard,
      What man shall stop us, and what God shall smite?
         Do thou but look in our dead eyes,
   They are stars that light each other till thy sundawn rise.



12


   Thou art the eye of this blind body of man,
      The tongue of this dumb people; shalt thou not
   See, shalt thou speak not for them?
      Time is wan And hope is weak with waiting, and swift thought
   Hath lost the wings at heel wherewith he ran,
      And on the red pitâs edge sits down distraught
   To talk with death of days republican
      And dreams and fights long since dreamt out and fought;
            Of the last hope that drew
            To that red edge anew
      The firewhite faith of Poland without spot;
            Of the blind Russian might,
            And fire that is not light;
      Of the green Rhineland where thy spirit wrought;
         But though time, hope, and memory tire,
   Canst thou wax dark as they do, thou whose light is fire?



13


   I set the trumpet to my lips and blow.
      The night is broken westward; the wide sea
   That makes immortal motion to and fro
      From worldâs end unto worldâs end, and shall be
   When nought now grafted of menâs hands shall grow
      And as the weed in last yearâs waves are we
   Or spray the sea-wind shook a year ago
      From its sharp tresses down the storm to lee,
            The moving god that hides
            Time in its timeless tides
      Wherein time dead seems live eternity,
            That breaks and makes again
            Much mightier things than men,
      Doth it not hear change coming, or not see?
         Are the deeps deaf and dead and blind,
   To catch no light or sound from landward of mankind?



14


   O thou, clothed round with raiment of white waves,
      Thy brave brows lightening through the grey wet air,
   Thou, lulled with sea-sounds of a thousand caves,
      And lit with sea-shine to thine inland lair,
   Whose freedom clothed the naked souls of slaves
      And stripped the muffled souls of tyrants bare,
   O, by the centuries of thy glorious graves,
      By the live light of the earth that was thy care,
            Live, thou must not be dead,
            Live; let thine armÃ¨d head
      Lift itself up to sunward and the fair
            Daylight of time and man,
            Thine head republican,
      With the same splendour on thine helmless hair
         That in his eyes kept up a light
   Who on thy glory gazed away their sacred sight;



15


   Who loved and looked their sense to death on thee;
      Who taught thy lips imperishable things,
   And in thine ears outsang thy singing sea;
      Who made thy foot firm on the necks of kings
   And thy soul somewhile steadfastâwoe are we
      It was but for a while, and all the strings
   Were broken of thy spirit; yet had he
      Set to such tunes and clothed it with such wings
            It seemed for his sole sake
            Impossible to break,
      And woundless of the worm that waits and stings,
            The golden-headed worm
            Made headless for a term,
      The king-snake whose life kindles with the springâs,
         To breathe his soul upon her bloom,
   And while she marks not turn her temple to her tomb.



16


   By those eyes blinded and that heavenly head
      And the secluded soul adorable,
   O Miltonâs land, what ails thee to be dead?
      Thine ears are yet sonorous with his shell
   That all the songs of all thy sea-line fed
      With motive sound of spring-tides at mid swell,
   And through thine heart his thought as blood is shed,
      Requickening thee with wisdom to do well;
            Such sons were of thy womb,
            England, for love of whom
      Thy name is not yet writ with theirs that fell,
            But, till thou quite forget
            What were thy children, yet
      On the pale lips of hope is as a spell;
         And Shelleyâs heart and Landorâs mind
   Lit thee with latter watch-fires; why wilt thou be blind?



17


   Though all were else indifferent, all that live
      Spiritless shapes of nations; though time wait
   In vain on hope till these have help to give,
      And faith and love crawl famished from the gate;
   Canst thou sit shamed and self-contemplative
      With soulless eyes on thy secluded fate?
   Though time forgive them, thee shall he forgive,
      Whose choice was in thine hand to be so great?
            Who cast out of thy mind
            The passion of manâs kind,
   And made thee and thine old name separate?
            Now when time looks to see
            New names and old and thee
      Build up our one Republic state by state,
         England with France, and France with Spain,
   And Spain with sovereign Italy strike hands and reign.



18


   O known and unknown fountain-heads that fill
      Our dear life-springs of England!  O bright race
   Of streams and waters that bear witness still
      To the earth her sons were made of!  O fair face
   Of England, watched of eyes death cannot kill,
      How should the soul that lit you for a space
   Fall through sick weakness of a broken will
      To the dead cold damnation of disgrace?
            Such wind of memory stirs
            On all green hills of hers,
      Such breath of record from so high a place,
            From years whose tongues of flame
            Prophesied in her name
      Her feet should keep truthâs bright and burning trace,
         We needs must have her heart with us,
   Whose hearts are one with manâs; she must be dead or thus.



19


   Who is against us? who is on our side?
      Whose heart of all menâs hearts is one with manâs?
   Where art thou that wast prophetess and bride,
      When truth and thou trod under time and chance?
   What latter light of what new hope shall guide
      Out of the snares of hell thy feet, O France?
   What heel shall bruise these heads that hiss and glide,
      What wind blow out these fen-born fires that dance
            Before thee to thy death?
            No light, no life, no breath,
      From thy dead eyes and lips shall take the trance,
            Till on that deadliest crime
            Reddening the feet of time
      Who treads through blood and passes, time shall glance
         Pardon, and Italy forgive,
   And Rome arise up whom thou slewest, and bid thee live.



20


   I set the trumpet to my lips and blow.
      The night is broken southward; the springs run,
   The daysprings and the watersprings that flow
      Forth with one will from where their source was one,
   Out of the might of morning: high and low,
      The hungering hills feed full upon the sun,
   The thirsting valleys drink of him and glow
      As a heart burns with some divine thing done,
            Or as blood burns again
            In the bruised heart of Spain,
      A rose renewed with red new life begun,
            Dragged down with thorns and briers,
            That puts forth buds like fires
      Till the whole tree take flower in unison,
         And prince that clogs and priest that clings
   Be cast as weeds upon the dunghill of dead things.



21


   Ah heaven, bow down, be nearer!  This is she,
      Italia, the worldâs wonder, the worldâs care,
   Free in her heart ere quite her hands be free,
      And lovelier than her loveliest robe of air.
   The earth hath voice, and speech is in the sea,
      Sounds of great joy, too beautiful to bear;
   All things are glad because of her, but we
      Most glad, who loved her when the worst days were.
            O sweetest, fairest, first,
            O flower, when times were worst,
      Thou hadst no stripe wherein we had no share.
            Have not our hearts held close,
            Kept fast the whole worldâs rose?
      Have we not worn thee at heart whom none would wear?
         First love and last love, light of lands,
   Shall we not touch thee full-blown with our lips and hands?



22


   O too much loved, what shall we say of thee?
      What shall we make of our heartâs burning fire,
   The passion in our lives that fain would be
      Made each a brand to pile into the pyre
   That shall burn up thy foemen, and set free
      The flame whence thy sun-shadowing wings aspire?
   Love of our life, what more than men are we,
      That this our breath for thy sake should expire,
            For whom to joyous death
            Glad gods might yield their breath,
      Great gods drop down from heaven to serve for hire?
            We are but men, are we,
            And thou art Italy;
      What shall we do for thee with our desire?
         What gift shall we deserve to give?
   How shall we die to do thee service, or how live?



23


   The very thought in us how much we love thee
      Makes the throat sob with love and blinds the eyes.
   How should love bear thee, to behold above thee
      His own light burning from reverberate skies?
   They give thee light, but the light given them of thee
      Makes faint the wheeling fires that fall and rise.
   What love, what life, what death of manâs should move thee,
      What face that lingers or what foot that flies?
            It is not heaven that lights
            Thee with such days and nights,
      But thou that heaven is lit from in such wise.
            O thou her dearest birth,
      Turn thee to lighten earth,
      Earth too that bore thee and yearns to thee and cries;
      Stand up, shine, lighten, become flame,
   Till as the sunâs name through all nations be thy name.



24


   I take the trumpet from my lips and sing.
      O life immeasurable and imminent love,
   And fear like winter leading hope like spring,
      Whose flower-bright brows the day-star sits above,
   Whose hand unweariable and untiring wing
      Strike music from a world that wailed and strove,
   Each bright soul born and every glorious thing,
      From very freedom to manâs joy thereof,
            O time, O change and death,
         Whose now not hateful breath
      But gives the music swifter feet to move
         Through sharp remeasuring tones
            Of refluent antiphones
      More tender-tuned than heart or throat of dove,
      Soul into soul, song into song,
   Life changing into life, by laws that work not wrong;



25


   O natural force in spirit and sense, that art
      One thing in all things, fruit of thine own fruit,
   O thought illimitable and infinite heart
      Whose blood is life in limbs indissolute
   That still keeps hurtless thine invisible part
      And inextirpable thy viewless root
   Whence all sweet shafts of green and each thy dart
      Of sharpening leaf and bud resundering shoot;
            Hills that the day-star hails,
            Heights that the first beam scales,
      And heights that souls outshining suns salute,
            Valleys for each mouth born
            Free now of plenteous corn,
      Waters and woodlandsâ musical or mute;
         Free winds that brighten brows as free,
   And thunder and laughter and lightning of the sovereign sea;



26


   Rivers and springs, and storms that seek your prey;
      With strong wings ravening through the skies by night;
   Spirits and stars that hold one choral way;
      O light of heaven, and thou the heavenlier light
   Aflame above the souls of men that sway
      All generations of all years with might;
   O sunrise of the repossessing day,
      And sunrise of all-renovating right;
            And thou, whose trackless foot
            Mocks hopeâs or fearâs pursuit,
      Swift Revolution, changing depth with height;
            And thou, whose mouth makes one
            All songs that seek the sun,
      Serene Republic of a world made white;
      Thou, Freedom, whence the soulâs springs ran;
   Praise earth for manâs sake living, and for earthâs sake man.



27


   Make yourselves wings, O tarrying feet of fate,
      And hidden hour that hast our hope to bear,
   A child-god, through the morning-coloured gate
      That lets love in upon the golden air,
   Dead on whose threshold lies heart-broken hate,
      Dead discord, dead injustice, dead despair;
   O love long looked for, wherefore wilt thou wait,
      And shew not yet the dawn on thy bright hair.
            Not yet thine hand released
            Refreshing the faint east,
      Thine hand reconquering heaven, to seat man there?
            Come forth, be born and live,
            Thou that hast help to give
      And light to make manâs day of manhood fair:
         With flight outflying the spherÃ¨d sun,
   Hasten thine hour and halt not, till thy work be done.




A WATCH IN THE NIGHT


1


   WATCHMAN, what of the night?â
      Storm and thunder and rain,
      Lights that waver and wane,
   Leaving the watchfires unlit.
   Only the balefires are bright,
      And the flash of the lamps now and then
   From a palace where spoilers sit,
      Trampling the children of men.



2


   Prophet, what of the night?â
      I stand by the verge of the sea,
      Banished, uncomforted, free,
   Hearing the noise of the waves
   And sudden flashes that smite
      Some manâs tyrannous head,
   Thundering, heard among graves
      That hide the hosts of his dead.



3


   Mourners, what of the night?â
      All night through without sleep
      We weep, and we weep, and we weep.
   Who shall give us our sons?
   Beaks of raven and kite,
      Mouths of wolf and of hound,
   Give us them back whom the guns
      Shot for you dead on the ground.



4


   Dead men, what of the night?â
      Cannon and scaffold and sword,
      Horror of gibbet and cord,
   Mowed us as sheaves for the grave,
   Mowed us down for the right.
      We do not grudge or repent.
   Freely to freedom we gave
      Pledges, till life should be spent.



5


   Statesman, what of the night?â
      The night will last me my time.
      The gold on a crown or a crime
   Looks well enough yet by the lamps.
   Have we not fingers to write,
      Lips to swear at a need?
   Then, when danger decamps,
      Bury the word with the deed.



6


   Warrior, what of the night?â
      Whether it be not or be
      Night, is as one thing to me.
   I for one, at the least,
   Ask not of dews if they blight,
      Ask not of flames if they slay,
   Ask not of prince or of priest
      How long ere we put them away.



7


   Master, what of the night?â
      Child, night is not at all
      Anywhere, fallen or to fall,
   Save in our star-stricken eyes.
   Forth of our eyes it takes flight,
      Look we but once nor before
   Nor behind us, but straight on the skies;
      Night is not then any more.



8


   Exile, what of the night?â
      The tides and the hours run out,
      The seasons of death and of doubt,
   The night-watches bitter and sore.
   In the quicksands leftward and right
      My feet sink down under me;
   But I know the scents of the shore
      And the broad blown breaths of the sea.



9


   Captives, what of the night?â
      It rains outside overhead
      Always, a rain that is red,
   And our faces are soiled with the rain.
   Here in the seasonsâ despite
      Day-time and night-time are one,
   Till the curse of the kings and the chain
      Break, and their toils be undone.



10


   Christian, what of the night?â
      I cannot tell; I am blind.
      I halt and hearken behind
   If haply the hours will go back
   And return to the dear dead light,
      To the watchfires and stars that of old
   Shone where the sky now is black,
      Glowed where the earth now is cold.



11


   High priest, what of the night?â
      The night is horrible here
      With haggard faces and fear,
   Blood, and the burning of fire.
   Mine eyes are emptied of sight,
      Mine hands are full of the dust.
   If the God of my faith be a liar,
      Who is it that I shall trust?



12


   Princes, what of the night?â
      Night with pestilent breath
      Feeds us, children of death,
   Clothes us close with her gloom.
   Rapine and famine and fright
      Crouch at our feet and are fed.
   Earth where we pass is a tomb,
      Life where we triumph is dead.



13


   Martyrs, what of the night?â
      Nay, is it night with you yet?
      We, for our part, we forget
   What night was, if it were.
   The loud red mouths of the fight
      Are silent and shut where we are.
   In our eyes the tempestuous air
      Shines as the face of a star.



14


   England, what of the night?â
      Night is for slumber and sleep,
      Warm, no season to weep.
   Let me alone till the day.
   Sleep would I still if I might,
      Who have slept for two hundred years.
   Once I had honour, they say;
      But slumber is sweeter than tears.



15


   France, what of the night?â
      Night is the prostituteâs noon,
      Kissed and drugged till she swoon,
   Spat upon, trod upon, whored.
   With bloodred rose-garlands dight,
      Round me reels in the dance
   Death, my saviour, my lord,
      Crowned; there is no more France.



16


   Italy, what of the night?â
      Ah, child, child, it is long!
      Moonbeam and starbeam and song
   Leave it dumb now and dark.
   Yet I perceive on the height
      Eastward, not now very far,
   A song too loud for the lark,
      A light too strong for a star.



17


   Germany, what of the night?â
      Long has it lulled me with dreams;
      Now at midwatch, as it seems,
   Light is brought back to mine eyes,
   And the mastery of old and the might
      Lives in the joints of mine hands,
   Steadies my limbs as they rise,
      Strengthens my foot as it stands.



18


   Europe, what of the night?â
      Ask of heaven, and the sea,
      And my babes on the bosom of me,
   Nations of mine, but ungrown.
   There is one who shall surely requite
      All that endure or that err:
   She can answer alone:
      Ask not of me, but of her.



19


   Liberty, what of the night?â
      I feel not the red rains fall,
      Hear not the tempest at all,
   Nor thunder in heaven any more.
   All the distance is white
      With the soundless feet of the sun.
   Night, with the woes that it wore,
      Night is over and done.




SUPER FLUMINA BABYLONIS


   BY the waters of Babylon we sat down and wept,
         Remembering thee,
   That for ages of agony hast endured, and slept,
         And wouldst not see.

   By the waters of Babylon we stood up and sang,
         Considering thee,
   That a blast of deliverance in the darkness rang,
         To set thee free.

   And with trumpets and thunderings and with morning song
         Came up the light;
   And thy spirit uplifted thee to forget thy wrong
         As day doth night.

   And thy sons were dejected not any more, as then
         When thou wast shamed;
   When thy lovers went heavily without heart, as men
         Whose life was maimed.

   In the desolate distances, with a great desire,
         For thy loveâs sake,
   With our hearts going back to thee, they were filled with fire,
         Were nigh to break.

   It was said to us: âVerily ye are great of heart,
         But ye shall bend;
   Ye are bondmen and bondwomen, to be scourged and smart,
         To toil and tend.â

   And with harrows men harrowed us, and subdued with spears,
         And crushed with shame;
   And the summer and winter was, and the length of years,
         And no change came.

   By the rivers of Italy, by the sacred streams,
         By town, by tower,
   There was feasting with revelling, there was sleep with dreams,
         Until thine hour.

   And they slept and they rioted on their rose-hung beds,
         With mouths on flame,
   And with love-locks vine-chapleted, and with rose-crowned heads
         And robes of shame.

   And they knew not their forefathers, nor the hills and streams
         And words of power,
   Nor the gods that were good to them, but with songs and dreams
         Filled up their hour.

   By the rivers of Italy, by the dry streamsâ beds,
         When thy time came,
   There was casting of crowns from them, from their young menâs heads,
         The crowns of shame.

   By the horn of Eridanus, by the Tiber mouth,
         As thy day rose,
   They arose up and girded them to the north and south,
         By seas, by snows.

   As a water in January the frost confines,
         Thy kings bound thee;
   As a water in April is, in the new-blown vines,
         Thy sons made free.

   And thy lovers that looked for thee, and that mourned from far,
         For thy sake dead,
   We rejoiced in the light of thee, in the signal star
         Above thine head.

   In thy grief had we followed thee, in thy passion loved,
         Loved in thy loss;
   In thy shame we stood fast to thee, with thy pangs were moved,
         Clung to thy cross.

   By the hillside of Calvary we beheld thy blood,
         Thy bloodred tears,
   As a motherâs in bitterness, an unebbing flood,
         Years upon years.

   And the north was Gethsemane, without leaf or bloom,
         A garden sealed;
   And the south was Aceldama, for a sanguine fume
         Hid all the field.

   By the stone of the sepulchre we returned to weep,
         From far, from prison;
   And the guards by it keeping it we beheld asleep,
         But thou wast risen.

   And an angelâs similitude by the unsealed grave,
         And by the stone:
   And the voice was angelical, to whose words God gave
         Strength like his own.

   âLo, the graveclothes of Italy that are folded up
         In the graveâs gloom!
   And the guards as men wrought upon with a charmÃ¨d cup,
         By the open tomb.

   âAnd her body most beautiful, and her shining head,
         These are not here;
   For your mother, for Italy, is not surely dead:
         Have ye no fear.

   âAs of old time she spake to you, and you hardly heard,
         Hardly took heed,
   So now also she saith to you, yet another word,
         Who is risen indeed.

   âBy my saying she saith to you, in your ears she saith,
         Who hear these things,
   Put no trust in menâs royalties, nor in great menâs breath,
         Nor words of kings.

   âFor the life of them vanishes and is no more seen,
         Nor no more known;
   Nor shall any remember him if a crown hath been,
         Or where a throne.

   âUnto each man his handiwork, unto each his crown,
         The just Fate gives;
   Whoso takes the worldâs life on him and his own lays down,
         He, dying so, lives.

   âWhoso bears the whole heaviness of the wronged worldâs weight
         And puts it by,
   It is well with him suffering, though he face manâs fate;
         How should he die?

   âSeeing death has no part in him any more, no power
         Upon his head;
   He has bought his eternity with a little hour,
         And is not dead.

   âFor an hour, if ye look for him, he is no more found,
         For one hourâs space;
   Then ye lift up your eyes to him and behold him crowned,
         A deathless face.

   âOn the mountains of memory, by the worldâs wellsprings,
         In all menâs eyes,
   Where the light of the life of him is on all past things,
         Death only dies.

   âNot the light that was quenched for us, nor the deeds that were,
         Nor the ancient days,
   Nor the sorrows not sorrowful, nor the face most fair
         Of perfect praise.â

   So the angel of Italyâs resurrection said,
         So yet he saith;
   So the son of her suffering, that from breasts nigh dead
         Drew life, not death.

   That the pavement of Golgotha should be white as snow,
         Not red, but white;
   That the waters of Babylon should no longer flow,
         And men see light.




THE HALT BEFORE ROME
SEPTEMBER 1867


   IS it so, that the sword is broken,
      Our sword, that was halfway drawn?
   Is it so, that the light was a spark,
   That the bird we hailed as the lark
   Sang in her sleep in the dark,
   And the song we took for a token
      Bore false witness of dawn?

   Spread in the sight of the lion,
      Surely, we said, is the net
   Spread but in vain, and the snare
   Vain; for the light is aware,
   And the common, the chainless air,
   Of his coming whom all we cry on;
      Surely in vain is it set.

   Surely the day is on our side,
      And heaven, and the sacred sun;
   Surely the stars, and the bright
   Immemorial inscrutable night:
   Yea, the darkness, because of our light,
   Is no darkness, but blooms as a bower-side
      When the winter is over and done;

   Blooms underfoot with young grasses
      Green, and with leaves overhead,
   Windflowers white, and the low
   New-dropped blossoms of snow;
   And or ever the May winds blow,
   And or ever the March wind passes,
      Flames with anemones red.

   We are here in the worldâs bower-garden,
      We that have watched out the snow.
   Surely the fruitfuller showers,
   The splendider sunbeams are ours;
   Shall winter return on the flowers,
   And the frost after April harden,
      And the fountains in May not flow?

   We have in our hands the shining
      And the fire in our hearts of a star.
   Who are we that our tongues should palter,
   Hearts bow down, hands falter,
   Who are clothed as with flame from the altar,
   That the kings of the earth, repining,
      Far off, watch from afar?

   Woe is ours if we doubt or dissemble,
      Woe, if our hearts not abide.
   Are our chiefs not among us, we said,
   Great chiefs, living and dead,
   To lead us glad to be led?
   For whose sake, if a man of us tremble,
      He shall not be on our side.

   What matter if these lands tarry,
      That tarried (we said) not of old?
   France, made drunken by fate,
   England, that bore up the weight
   Once of menâs freedom, a freight
   Holy, but heavy to carry
      For hands overflowing with gold.

   Though this be lame, and the other
      Fleet, but blind from the sun,
   And the race be no more to these,
   Alas! nor the palm to seize,
   Who are weary and hungry of ease,
   Yet, O Freedom, we said, O our mother,
      Is there not left to thee one?

   Is there not left of thy daughters,
      Is there not one to thine hand?
   Fairer than these, and of fame
   Higher from of old by her name;
   Washed in her tears, and in flame
   Bathed as in baptism of waters,
      Unto all men a chosen land.

   Her hope in her heart was broken,
      Fire was upon her, and clomb,
   Hiding her, high as her head;
   And the world went past her, and said
   (We heard it say) she was dead;
   And now, behold, she bath spoken,
      She that was dead, saying, âRome.â

   O mother of all menâs nations,
      Thou knowest if the deaf world heard!
   Heard not now to her lowest
   Depths, where the strong blood slowest
   Beats at her bosom, thou knowest,
   In her toils, in her dim tribulations,
      Rejoiced not, hearing the word.

   The sorrowful, bound unto sorrow,
      The woe-worn people, and all
   That of old were discomforted,
   And men that famish for bread,
   And men that mourn for their dead,
   She bade them be glad on the morrow,
      Who endured in the day of her thrall.

   The blind, and the people in prison,
      Souls without hope, without home,
   How glad were they all that heard!
   When the winged white flame of the word
   Passed over menâs dust, and stirred
   Death; for Italia was risen,
      And risen her light upon Rome.

   The light of her sword in the gateway
      Shone, an unquenchable flame,
   Bloodless, a sword to release,
   A light from the eyes of peace,
   To bid grief utterly cease,
   And the wrong of the old world straightway
      Pass from the face of her fame:

   Hers, whom we turn to and cry on,
      Italy, mother of men:
   From the light of the face of her glory,
   At the sound of the storm of her story,
   That the sanguine shadows and hoary
   Should flee from the foot of the lion,
      Lion-like, forth of his den.

   As the answering of thunder to thunder
      Is the storm-beaten sound of her past;
   As the calling of sea unto sea
   Is the noise of her years yet to be;
   For this ye knew not is she,
   Whose bonds are broken in sunder;
      This is she at the last.

   So spake we aloud, high-minded,
      Full of our will; and behold,
   The speech that was halfway spoken
   Breaks, as a pledge that is broken,
   As a kingâs pledge, leaving in token
   Grief only for high hopes blinded,
      New grief grafted on old.

   We halt by the walls of the city,
      Within sound of the clash of her chain.
   Hearing, we know that in there
   The lioness chafes in her lair,
   Shakes the storm of her hair,
   Struggles in hands without pity,
      Roars to the lion in vain.

   Whose hand is stretched forth upon her?
      Whose curb is white with her foam?
   Clothed with the cloud of his deeds,
   Swathed in the shroud of his creeds,
   Who is this that has trapped her and leads,
   Who turns to despair and dishonour
      Her name, her name that was Rome?

   Over fields without harvest or culture,
      Over hordes without honour or love,
   Over nations that groan with their kings,
   As an imminent pestilence flings
   Swift death from her shadowing wings,
   So he, who hath claws as a vulture,
      Plumage and beak as a dove.

   He saith, âI am pilot and haven,
      Light and redemption I am
   Unto souls overlaboured,â he saith;
   And to all men the blast of his breath
   Is a savour of death unto death;
   And the Dove of his worship a raven,
      And a wolf-cub the life-giving Lamb.

   He calls his sheep as a shepherd,
      Calls from the wilderness home,
   âCome unto me and be fed,â
   To feed them with ashes for bread
   And grass from the graves of the dead,
   Leaps on the fold as a leopard,
      Slays, and says, âI am Rome,â

   Rome, having rent her in sunder,
      With the clasp of an adder he clasps;
   Swift to shed blood are his feet,
   And his lips, that have man for their meat,
   Smoother than oil, and more sweet
   Than honey, but hidden thereunder
      Festers the poison of asps.

   As swords are his tender mercies,
      His kisses as mortal stings;
   Under his hallowing hands
   Life dies down in all lands;
   Kings pray to him, prone where he stands,
   And his blessings, as other menâs curses,
      Disanoint where they consecrate kings.

   With an oil of unclean consecration,
      With effusion of blood and of tears,
   With uplifting of cross and of keys,
   Priest, though thou hallow us these,
   Yet even as they cling to thy knees
   Nation awakens by nation,
      King by king disappears.

   How shall the spirit be loyal
      To the shell of a spiritless thing?
   Erred once, in only a word,
   The sweet great song that we heard
   Poured upon Tuscany, erred,
   Calling a crowned man royal
      That was no more than a king.

   Sea-eagle of English feather,
      A song-bird beautiful-souled,
   She knew not them that she sang;
   The golden trumpet that rang
   From Florence, in vain for them, sprang
   As a note in the nightingalesâ weather
      Far over Fiesole rolled.

   She saw notâhappy, not seeingâ
      Saw not as we with her eyes
   Aspromonte; she felt
   Never the heart in her melt
   As in us when the news was dealt
   Melted all hope out of being,
      Dropped all dawn from the skies.

   In that weary funereal season,
      In that heart-stricken grief-ridden time,
   The weight of a king and the worth,
   With anger and sorrowful mirth,
   We weighed in the balance of earth,
   And light was his word as a treason,
      And heavy his crown as a crime.

   Banners of kings shall ye follow
      None, and have thrones on your side
   None; ye shall gather and grow
   Silently, row upon row,
   Chosen of Freedom to go
   Gladly where darkness may swallow,
      Gladly where death may divide.

   Have we not men with us royal,
      Men the masters of things?
   In the days when our life is made new,
   All souls perfect and true
   Shall adore whom their forefathers slew;
   And these indeed shall be loyal,
      And those indeed shall be kings.

   Yet for a space they abide with us,
      Yet for a little they stand,
   Bearing the heat of the day.
   When their presence is taken away,
   We shall wonder and worship, and say,
   âWas not a star on our side with us?
      Was not a God at our hand?â

   These, O men, shall ye honour,
      Liberty only, and these.
   For thy sake and for all menâs and mine,
   Brother, the crowns of them shine
   Lighting the way to her shrine,
   That our eyes may be fastened upon her,
      That our hands may encompass her knees.

   In this day is the sign of her shown to you;
      Choose ye, to live or to die,
   Now is her harvest in hand;
   Now is her light in the land;
   Choose ye, to sink or to stand,
   For the might of her strength is made known to you
      Now, and her arm is on high.

   Serve not for any manâs wages,
      Pleasure nor glory nor gold;
   Not by her side are they won
   Who saith unto each of you, âSon,
   Silver and gold have I none;
   I give but the love of all ages,
      And the life of my people of old.â

   Fear not for any manâs terrors;
      Wait not for any manâs word;
   Patiently, each in his place,
   Gird up your loins to the race;
   Following the print of her pace,
   Purged of desires and of errors,
      March to the tune ye have heard.

   March to the tune of the voice of her,
      Breathing the balm of her breath,
   Loving the light of her skies.
   Blessed is he on whose eyes
   Dawns but her light as he dies;
   Blessed are ye that make choice of her,
      Equal to life and to death.

   Ye that when faith is nigh frozen,
      Ye that when hope is nigh gone,
   Still, over wastes, over waves,
   Still, among wrecks, among graves,
   Follow the splendour that saves,
   Happy, her children, her chosen,
      Loyally led of her on.

   The sheep of the priests, and the cattle
      That feed in the penfolds of kings,
   Sleek is their flock and well-fed;
   Hardly she giveth you bread,
   Hardly a rest for the head,
   Till the day of the blast of the battle
      And the storm of the wind of her wings.

   Ye that have joy in your living,
      Ye that are careful to live,
   You her thunders go by:
   Live, let men be, let them lie,
   Serve your season, and die;
   Gifts have your masters for giving,
      Gifts hath not Freedom to give;

   She, without shelter or station,
      She, beyond limit or bar,
   Urges to slumberless speed
   Armies that famish, that bleed,
   Sowing their lives for her seed,
   That their dust may rebuild her a nation,
      That their souls may relight her a star.

   Happy are all they that follow her;
      Them shall no trouble cast down;
   Though she slay them, yet shall they trust in her,
   For unsure there is nought nor unjust in her,
   Blemish is none, neither rust in her;
   Though it threaten, the night shall not swallow her,
      Tempest and storm shall not drown.

   Hither, O strangers, that cry for her,
      Holding your lives in your hands,
   Hither, for here is your light,
   Where Italy is, and her might;
   Strength shall be given you to fight,
   Grace shall be given you to die for her,
      For the flower, for the lady of lands;

   Turn ye, whose anguish oppressing you
      Crushes, asleep and awake,
   For the wrong which is wrought as of yore;
   That Italia may give of her store,
   Having these things to give and no more;
   Only her hands on you, blessing you;
      Only a pang for her sake;

   Only her bosom to die on;
      Only her heart for a home,
   And a name with her children to be
   From Calabrian to Adrian sea
   Famous in cities made free
   That ring to the roar of the lion
      Proclaiming republican Rome.




MENTANA: FIRST ANNIVERSARY


   AT the time when the stars are grey,
      And the gold of the molten moon
   Fades, and the twilight is thinned,
   And the sun leaps up, and the wind,
   A light rose, not of the day,
      A stronger light than of noon.

   As the light of a face much loved
      Was the face of the light that clomb;
   As a motherâs whitened with woes
   Her adorable head that arose;
   As the sound of a God that is moved,
      Her voice went forth upon Rome.

   At her lips it fluttered and failed
      Twice, and sobbed into song,
   And sank as a flame sinks under;
   Then spake, and the speech was thunder,
   And the cheek as he heard it paled
      Of the wrongdoer grown grey with the wrong.

   âIs it time, is it time appointed,
      Angel of time, is it near?
   For the spent night aches into day
   When the kings shall slay not or pray,
   And the high-priest, accursed and anointed,
      Sickens to deathward with fear.

   âFor the bones of my slain are stirred,
      And the seed of my earth in her womb
   Moves as the heart of a bud
   Beating with odorous blood
   To the tune of the loud first bird
      Burns and yearns into bloom.

   âI lay my hand on her bosom,
      My hand on the heart of my earth,
   And I feel as with shiver and sob
   The triumphant heart in her throb,
   The dead petals dilate into blossom,
      The divine blood beat into birth.

   âO my earth, are the springs in thee dry?
      O sweet, is thy body a tomb?
   Nay, springs out of springs derive,
   And summers from summers alive,
   And the living from them that die;
      No tomb is here, but a womb.

   âO manifold womb and divine,
      Give me fruit of my children, give!
   I have given thee my dew for thy root,
   Give thou me for my mouth of thy fruit;
   Thine are the dead that are mine,
      And mine are thy sons that live.

   âO goodly children, O strong
      Italian spirits, that wear
   My glories as garments about you,
   Could time or the world misdoubt you,
   Behold, in disproof of the wrong,
      The field of the grave-pits there.

   âAnd ye that fell upon sleep,
      We have you too with us yet.
   Fairer than life or than youth
   Is this, to die for the truth:
   No death can sink you so deep
      As their graves whom their brethren forget.

   âWere not your pains as my pains?
      As my name are your names not divine?
   Was not the light in your eyes
   Mine, the light of my skies,
   And the sweet shed blood of your veins,
      O my beautiful martyrs, mine?

   âOf mine earth were your dear limbs made,
      Of mine air was your sweet lifeâs breath;
   At the breasts of my love ye were fed,
   O my children, my chosen, my dead,
   At my breasts where again ye are laid,
      At the old motherâs bosom, in death.

   âBut ye that live, O their brothers,
      Be ye to me as they were;
   Give me, my children that live,
   What these dead grudged not to give,
   Who alive were sons of your motherâs,
      Whose lips drew breath of your air.

   âTill darkness by dawn be cloven,
      Let youthâs self mourn and abstain;
   And loveâs self find not an hour,
   And springâs self wear not a flower,
   And Lycoris, with hair unenwoven,
      Hail back to the banquet in vain.

   âSo sooner and surer the glory
      That is not with us shall be,
   And stronger the hands that smite
   The heads of the sons of night,
   And the sound throughout earth of our story
      Give all men heart to be free.â




BLESSED AMONG WOMEN


                          TO THE SIGNORA CAIROLI



1


         BLESSED was she that bare,
         Hidden in flesh most fair,
   For all menâs sake the likeness of all love;
         Holy that virginâs womb,
         The old record saith, on whom
   The glory of God alighted as a dove;
      Blessed, who brought to gracious birth
   The sweet-souled Saviour of a man-tormented earth.



2


         But four times art thou blest,
         At whose most holy breast
   Four times a godlike soldier-saviour hung;
         And thence a fourfold Christ
         Given to be sacrificed
   To the same cross as the same bosom clung;
      Poured the same blood, to leave the same
   Light on the many-folded mountain-skirts of fame.



3


         Shall they and thou not live,
         The children thou didst give
   Forth of thine hands, a godlike gift, to death,
         Through fire of death to pass
         For her high sake that was
   Thine and their mother, that gave all you breath?
      Shall ye not live till time drop dead,
   O mother, and each her childrenâs consecrated head?



4


         Many brought gifts to take
         For her loveâs supreme sake,
   Life and lifeâs love, pleasure and praise and rest,
         And went forth bare; but thou,
         So much once richer, and now
   Poorer than all these, more than these be blest;
      Poorer so much, by so much given,
   Than who gives earth for heavenâs sake, not for earthâs sake heaven.



5


         Somewhat could each soul save,
         What thing soever it gave,
   But thine, mother, what has thy soul kept back?
         None of thine all, not one,
         To serve thee and be thy son,
   Feed with love all thy days, lest one day lack;
      All thy whole lifeâs love, thine heartâs whole,
   Thou hast given as who gives gladly, O thou the supreme soul.



6


         The heartâs pure flesh and blood,
         The heaven thy motherhood,
   The live lips, the live eyes, that lived on thee;
         The hands that clove with sweet
         Blind clutch to thine, the feet
   That felt on earth their first way to thy knee;
      The little laughter of mouths milk-fed,
   Now open again to feed on dust among the dead;



7


         The fair, strong, young menâs strength,
         Light of life-days and length,
   And glory of earth seen under and stars above,
         And years that bring to tame
         Now the wild falcon fame,
   Now, to stroke smooth, the dove-white breast of love;
      The life unlived, the unsown seeds,
   Suns unbeholden, songs unsung, and undone deeds.



8


         Therefore shall manâs love be
         As an own son to thee,
   And the worldâs worship of thee for a child;
         All thine own land as one
         New-born, a nursing son,
   All thine own people a new birth undefiled;
      And all the unborn Italian time,
   And all its glory, and all its works, thy seed sublime.



9


         That henceforth no manâs breath,
         Saying âItaly,â but saith
   In that most sovereign word thine equal name;
         Nor can one speak of thee
         But he saith âItaly,â
   Seeing in two suns one co-eternal flame;
      One heat, one heaven, one heart, one fire,
   One light, one love, one benediction, one desire.



10


         Blest above praise and prayer
         And incense of menâs air,
   Thy place is higher than where such voices rise
         As in menâs temples make
         Music for some vain sake,
   This Godâs or that Godâs, in one weary wise;
      Thee the soul silent, the shut heart,
   The locked lips of the spirit praise thee that thou art.



11


         Yea, for manâs whole lifeâs length,
         And with manâs whole soulâs strength,
   We praise thee, O holy, and bless thee, O mother of lights;
         And send forth as on wings
         The worldâs heartâs thanksgivings,
   Song-birds to sing thy days through and thy nights;
      And wrap thee around and arch thee above
   With the air of benediction and the heaven of love.



12


         And toward thee our unbreathed words
         Fly speechless, winged as birds,
   As the Indian flock, children of Paradise,
         The winged things without feet,
         Fed with Godâs dew for meat,
   That live in the air and light of the utter skies;
      So fleet, so flying a footless flight,
   With wings for feet love seeks thee, to partake thy sight.



13


         Love like a clear sky spread
         Bends over thy loved head,
   As a new heaven bends over a new-born earth,
         When the old nightâs womb is great
         With young stars passionate
   And fair new planets fiery-fresh from birth;
      And moon-white here, there hot like Mars,
   Souls that are worlds shine on thee, spirits that are stars.



14


         Till the whole sky burns through
         With heavenâs own heart-deep hue,
   With passion-coloured glories of lit souls;
         And thine above all names
         Writ highest with lettering flames
   Lightens, and all the old starriest aureoles
      And all the old holiest memories wane,
   And the old names of loveâs chosen, found in thy sight vain.



15


         And crowned heads are discrowned,
         And stars sink without sound,
   And loveâs self for thy loveâs sake waxes pale
         Seeing from his storied skies
         In what new reverent wise
   Thee Romeâs most highest, her sovereign daughters, hail;
      Thee Portia, thee Veturia grey,
   Thee Arria, thee Cornelia, Roman more than they.



16


         Even all these as all we
         Subdue themselves to thee,
   Bow their heads haloed, quench their fiery fame;
         Seen through dim years divine,
         Their faint lights feminine
   Sink, then spring up rekindled from thy flame;
      Fade, then reflower and reillume
   From thy fresh spring their wintering age with new-blown bloom.



17


         To thy much holier head
         Even theirs, the holy and dead,
   Bow themselves each one from her heavenward height;
         Each in her shining turn,
         All tremble toward thee and yearn
   To melt in thine their consummated light;
      Till from dayâs Capitolian dome
   One glory of many glories lighten upon Rome.



18


         Hush thyself, song, and cease,
         Close, lips, and hold your peace;
   What help hast thou, what part have ye herein?
         But you, with sweet shut eyes,
         Heart-hidden memories,
   Dreams and dumb thoughts that keep what things have been
      Silent, and pure of all words said,
   Praise without song the living, without dirge the dead.



19


         Thou, strengthless in these things,
         Song, fold thy feebler wings,
   And as a pilgrim go forth girt and shod,
         And where the new graves are,
         And where the sunset star,
   To the pure spirit of man that men call God,
      To the high soul of things, that is
   Made of menâs heavenlier hopes and mightier memories;



20


         To the elements that make
         For the soulâs living sake
   This raiment of dead things, of shadow and trance,
         That give us chance and time
         Wherein to aspire and climb
   And set our lifeâs work higher than time or chance
      The old sacred elements, that give
   The breath of life to days that die, to deeds that live;



21


         To them, veiled gods and great,
         There bow thee and dedicate
   The speechless spirit in these thy weak words hidden;
         And mix thy reverent breath
         With holier air of death,
   At the high feast of sorrow a guest unbidden,
      Till with divine triumphal tears
   Thou fill menâs eyes who listen with a heart that hears.




THE LITANY OF NATIONS


    Î³Î± ÎÎ±, Î¼Î± ÎÎ±, Î²Î¿á½°Î½
    ÏÎ¿Î²ÎµÏÎ´Î½ á½°Ïá½¹ÏÏÎµÏÎµ.

                                                        ÃSCH. _Supp._ 890.



CHORUS


   IF with voice of words or prayers thy sons may reach thee,
      We thy latter sons, the men thine after-birth,
      We the children of thy grey-grown age, O Earth,
   O our mother everlasting, we beseech thee,
   By the sealed and secret ages of thy life;
      By the darkness wherein grew thy sacred forces;
      By the songs of stars thy sisters in their courses;
   By thine own song hoarse and hollow and shrill with strife;
   By thy voice distuned and marred of modulation;
      By the discord of thy measureâs march with theirs;
      By the beauties of thy bosom, and the cares;
   By thy glory of growth, and splendour of thy station;
   By the shame of men thy children, and the pride;
      By the pale-cheeked hope that sleeps and weeps and passes,
      As the grey dew from the morning mountain-grasses;
   By the white-lipped sightless memories that abide;
   By the silence and the sound of many sorrows;
      By the joys that leapt up living and fell dead;
      By the veil that hides thy hands and breasts and head,
   Wrought of divers-coloured days and nights and morrows;
   Isis, thou that knowest of God what worlds are worth,
      Thou the ghost of God, the mother uncreated,
      Soul for whom the floating forceless ages waited
   As our forceless fancies wait on thee, O Earth;
   Thou the body and soul, the father-God and mother,
      If at all it move thee, knowing of all things done
      Here where evil things and good things are not one,
   But their faces are as fire against each other;
   By thy morning and thine evening, night and day;
      By the first white light that stirs and strives and hovers
      As a bird above the brood her bosom covers,
   By the sweet last star that takes the westward way;
   By the night whose feet are shod with snow or thunder,
      Fledged with plumes of storm, or soundless as the dew;
      By the vesture bound of many-folded blue
   Round her breathless breasts, and all the woven wonder;
   By the golden-growing eastern stream of sea;
      By the sounds of sunrise moving in the mountains;
      By the forces of the floods and unsealed fountains;
   Thou that badest man be born, bid man be free.



GREECE


   I am she that made thee lovely with my beauty
         From north to south:
   Mine, the fairest lips, took first the fire of duty
         From thine own mouth.
   Mine, the fairest eyes, sought first thy laws and knew them
         Truths undefiled;
   Mine, the fairest hands, took freedom first into them,
         A weanling child.
   By my light, now he lies sleeping, seen above him
         Where none sees other;
   By my dead that loved and living men that love him;
      (Cho.)  Hear us, O mother.



ITALY


   I am she that was the light of thee enkindled
         When Greece grew dim;
   She whose life grew up with manâs free life, and dwindled
         With wane of him.
   She that once by sword and once by word imperial
         Struck bright thy gloom;
   And a third time, casting off these years funereal,
         Shall burst thy tomb.
   By that bond âtwixt thee and me whereat affrighted
         Thy tyrants fear us;
   By that hope and this remembrance reunited;
      (Cho.)  O mother, hear us.



SPAIN


   I am she that set my seal upon the nameless
         West worlds of seas;
   And my sons as brides took unto them the tameless
         Hesperides.
   Till my sins and sons through sinless lands dispersÃ¨d,
         With red flame shod,
   Made accurst the name of man, and thrice accursÃ¨d
         The name of God.
   Lest for those past fires the fires of my repentance
         Hellâs fume yet smother,
   Now my blood would buy remission of my sentence;
      (Cho.)  Hear us, O mother.



FRANCE


   I am she that was thy sign and standard-bearer,
         Thy voice and cry;
   She that washed thee with her blood and left thee fairer,
         The same was I.
   Were not these the hands that raised thee fallen and fed thee,
         These hands defiled?
   Was not I thy tongue that spake, thine eye that led thee,
         Not I thy child?
   By the darkness on our dreams, and the dead errors
         Of dead times near us;
   By the hopes that hang around thee, and the terrors;
      (Cho.)  O mother, hear us.



RUSSIA


   I am she whose hands are strong and her eyes blinded
         And lips athirst
   Till upon the night of nations many-minded
         One bright day burst:
   Till the myriad stars be molten into one light,
         And that light thine;
   Till the soul of man be parcel of the sunlight,
         And thine of mine.
   By the snows that blanch not him nor cleanse from slaughter
         Who slays his brother;
   By the stains and by the chains on me thy daughter;
      (Cho.)  Hear us, O mother.



SWITZERLAND


   I am she that shews on mighty limbs and maiden
         Nor chain nor stain;
   For what blood can touch these hands with gold unladen,
         These feet what chain?
   By the surf of spears one shieldless bosom breasted
         And was my shield,
   Till the plume-plucked Austrian vulture-heads twin-crested
         Twice drenched the field;
   By the snows and souls untrampled and untroubled
         That shine to cheer us,
   Light of those to these responsive and redoubled;
      (Cho.)  O mother, hear us.



GERMANY


   I am she beside whose forest-hidden fountains
         Slept freedom armed,
   By the magic born to music in my mountains
         Heart-chained and charmed.
   By those days the very dream whereof delivers
         My soul from wrong;
   By the sounds that make of all my ringing rivers
         None knows what song;
   By the many tribes and names of my division
         One from another;
   By the single eye of sun-compelling vision;
      (Cho.)  Hear us, O mother.



ENGLAND


   I am she that was and was not of thy chosen,
         Free, and not free;
   She that fed thy springs, till now her springs are frozen;
         Yet I am she.
   By the sea that clothed and sun that saw me splendid
         And fame that crowned,
   By the song-fires and the sword-fires mixed and blended
         That robed me round;
   By the star that Miltonâs soul for Shelleyâs lighted,
         Whose rays insphere us;
   By the beacon-bright Republic far-off sighted;
      (Cho.)  O mother, hear us.



CHORUS


   Turn away from us the cross-blown blasts of error,
         That drown each other;
   Turn away the fearful cry, the loud-tongued terror,
         O Earth, O mother.
   Turn away their eyes who track, their hearts who follow,
         The pathless past;
   Shew the soul of man, as summer shews the swallow,
         The way at last.
   By the sloth of men that all too long endure men
         On man to tread;
   By the cry of men, the bitter cry of poor men
      That faint for bread;
   By the blood-sweat of the people in the garden
      Inwalled of kings;
   By his passion interceding for their pardon
      Who do these things;
   By the sightless souls and fleshless limbs that labour
      For not their fruit;
   By the foodless mouth with foodless heart for neighbour,
      That, mad, is mute;
   By the child that famine eats as worms the blossom
      âAh God, the child!
   By the milkless lips that strain the bloodless bosom
      Till woe runs wild;
   By the pastures that give grass to feed the lamb in,
      Where men lack meat;
   By the cities clad with gold and shame and famine;
      By field and street;
   By the people, by the poor man, by the master
      That men call slave;
   By the cross-winds of defeat and of disaster,
      By wreck, by wave;
   By the helm that keeps us still to sunwards driving,
      Still eastward bound,
   Till, as night-watch ends, day burn on eyes reviving,
      And land be found:
   We thy children, that arraign not nor impeach thee
   Though no star steer us,
   By the waves that wash the morning we beseech thee,
      O mother, hear us.




HERTHA


         I AM that which began;
            Out of me the years roll;
         Out of me God and man;
            I am equal and whole;
   God changes, and man, and the form of them bodily; I am the soul.

         Before ever land was,
            Before ever the sea,
         Or soft hair of the grass,
            Or fair limbs of the tree,
   Or the flesh-coloured fruit of my branches, I was, and thy soul was in
   me.

         First life on my sources
            First drifted and swam;
         Out of me are the forces
            That save it or damn;
   Out of me man and woman, and wild-beast and bird; before God was, I
   am.

         Beside or above me
            Nought is there to go;
         Love or unlove me,
            Unknow me or know,
   I am that which unloves me and loves; I am stricken, and I am the
   blow.

         I the mark that is missed
            And the arrows that miss,
         I the mouth that is kissed
            And the breath in the kiss,
   The search, and the sought, and the seeker, the soul and the body that
   is.

         I am that thing which blesses
            My spirit elate;
         That which caresses
            With hands uncreate
   My limbs unbegotten that measure the length of the measure of fate.

         But what thing dost thou now,
            Looking Godward, to cry
         âI am I, thou art thou,
            I am low, thou art highâ?
   I am thou, whom thou seekest to find him; find thou but thyself, thou
   art I.

         I the grain and the furrow,
            The plough-cloven clod
         And the ploughshare drawn thorough,
            The germ and the sod,
   The deed and the doer, the seed and the sower, the dust which is God.

         Hast thou known how I fashioned thee,
            Child, underground?
         Fire that impassioned thee,
            Iron that bound,
   Dim changes of water, what thing of all these hast thou known of or
   found?

         Canst thou say in thine heart
            Thou hast seen with thine eyes
         With what cunning of art
            Thou wast wrought in what wise,
   By what force of what stuff thou wast shapen, and shown on my breast
   to the skies?

         Who hath given, who hath sold it thee,
            Knowledge of me?
         Hath the wilderness told it thee?
            Hast thou learnt of the sea?
   Hast thou communed in spirit with night? have the winds taken counsel
   with thee?

         Have I set such a star
            To show light on thy brow
         That thou sawest from afar
            What I show to thee now?
   Have ye spoken as brethren together, the sun and the mountains and
   thou?

         What is here, dost thou know it?
            What was, hast thou known?
         Prophet nor poet
            Nor tripod nor throne
   Nor spirit nor flesh can make answer, but only thy mother alone.

         Mother, not maker,
            Born, and not made;
         Though her children forsake her,
            Allured or afraid,
   Praying prayers to the God of their fashion, she stirs not for all
   that have prayed.

         A creed is a rod,
            And a crown is of night;
         But this thing is God,
            To be man with thy might,
   To grow straight in the strength of thy spirit, and live out thy life
   as the light.

         I am in thee to save thee,
            As my soul in thee saith;
         Give thou as I gave thee,
            Thy life-blood and breath,
   Green leaves of thy labour, white flowers of thy thought, and red
   fruit of thy death,

         Be the ways of thy giving
            As mine were to thee;
         The free life of thy living,
            Be the gift of it free;
   Not as servant to lord, nor as master to slave, shalt thou give thee
   to me.

         O children of banishment,
            Souls overcast,
         Were the lights ye see vanish meant
            Alway to last,
   Ye would know not the sun overshining the shadows and stars overpast.

         I that saw where ye trod
            The dim paths of the night
         Set the shadow called God
            In your skies to give light;
   But the morning of manhood is risen, and the shadowless soul is in
   sight.

         The tree many-rooted
            That swells to the sky
         With frondage red-fruited,
            The life-tree am I;
   In the buds of your lives is the sap of my leaves: ye shall live and
   not die.

         But the Gods of your fashion
            That take and that give,
         In their pity and passion
            That scourge and forgive,
   They are worms that are bred in the bark that falls off; they shall
   die and not live.

         My own blood is what stanches
            The wounds in my bark;
         Stars caught in my branches
            Make day of the dark,
   And are worshipped as suns till the sunrise shall tread out their
   fires as a spark.

         Where dead ages hide under
            The live roots of the tree,
         In my darkness the thunder
            Makes utterance of me;
   In the clash of my boughs with each other ye hear the waves sound of
   the sea.

         That noise is of Time,
            As his feathers are spread
         And his feet set to climb
            Through the boughs overhead,
   And my foliage rings round him and rustles, and branches are bent with
   his tread.

         The storm-winds of ages
            Blow through me and cease,
         The war-wind that rages,
            The spring-wind of peace,
   Ere the breath of them roughen my tresses, ere one of my blossoms
   increase.

         All sounds of all changes,
            All shadows and lights
         On the worldâs mountain-ranges
            And stream-riven heights,
   Whose tongue is the windâs tongue and language of storm-clouds on
   earth-shaking nights;

         All forms of all faces,
            All works of all hands
         In unsearchable places
            Of time-stricken lands,
   All death and all life, and all reigns and all ruins, drop through me
   as sands.

         Though sore be my burden
            And more than ye know,
         And my growth have no guerdon
            But only to grow,
   Yet I fail not of growing for lightnings above me or deathworms below.

         These too have their part in me,
            As I too in these;
         Such fire is at heart in me,
            Such sap is this treeâs,
   Which hath in it all sounds and all secrets of infinite lands and of
   seas.

         In the spring-coloured hours
            When my mind was as Mayâs,
         There brake forth of me flowers
            By centuries of days,
   Strong blossoms with perfume of manhood, shot out from my spirit as
   rays.

         And the sound of them springing
            And smell of their shoots
         Were as warmth and sweet singing
            And strength to my roots;
   And the lives of my children made perfect with freedom of soul were my
   fruits.

         I bid you but be;
            I have need not of prayer;
         I have need of you free
            As your mouths of mine air;
   That my heart may be greater within me, beholding the fruits of me
   fair.

         More fair than strange fruit is
            Of faiths ye espouse;
         In me only the root is
            That blooms in your boughs;
   Behold now your God that ye made you, to feed him with faith of your
   vows.

         In the darkening and whitening
            Abysses adored,
         With dayspring and lightning
            For lamp and for sword,
   God thunders in heaven, and his angels are red with the wrath of the
   Lord.

         O my sons, O too dutiful
            Toward Gods not of me,
         Was not I enough beautiful?
            Was it hard to be free?
   For behold, I am with you, am in you and of you; look forth now and
   see.

         Lo, winged with worldâs wonders,
            With miracles shod,
         With the fires of his thunders
            For raiment and rod,
   God trembles in heaven, and his angels are white with the terror of
   God.

         For his twilight is come on him,
            His anguish is here;
         And his spirits gaze dumb on him,
            Grown grey from his fear;
   And his hour taketh hold on him stricken, the last of his infinite
   year.

         Thought made him and breaks him,
            Truth slays and forgives;
         But to you, as time takes him,
            This new thing it gives,
   Even love, the beloved Republic, that feeds upon freedom and lives.

         For truth only is living,
            Truth only is whole,
         And the love of his giving
            Manâs polestar and pole;
   Man, pulse of my centre, and fruit of my body, and seed of my soul.

         One birth of my bosom;
            One beam of mine eye;
         One topmost blossom
            That scales the sky;
   Man, equal and one with me, man that is made of me, man that is I.




BEFORE A CRUCIFIX


   HERE, down between the dusty trees,
      At this lank edge of haggard wood,
   Women with labour-loosened knees,
      With gaunt backs bowed by servitude,
   Stop, shift their loads, and pray, and fare
   Forth with souls easier for the prayer.

   The suns have branded black, the rains
      Striped grey this piteous God of theirs;
   The face is full of prayers and pains,
      To which they bring their pains and prayers;
   Lean limbs that shew the labouring bones,
   And ghastly mouth that gapes and groans.

   God of this grievous people, wrought
      After the likeness of their race,
   By faces like thine own besought,
      Thine own blind helpless eyeless face,
   I too, that have nor tongue nor knee
   For prayer, I have a word to thee.

   It was for this then, that thy speech
      Was blown about the world in flame
   And menâs souls shot up out of reach
      Of fear or lust or thwarting shameâ
   That thy faith over souls should pass
   As sea-winds burning the grey grass?

   It was for this, that prayers like these
      Should spend themselves about thy feet,
   And with hard overlaboured knees
      Kneeling, these slaves of men should beat
   Bosoms too lean to suckle sons
   And fruitless as their orisons?

   It was for this, that men should make
      Thy name a fetter on menâs necks,
   Poor menâs made poorer for thy sake,
      And womenâs withered out of sex?
   It was for this, that slaves should be,
   Thy word was passed to set men free?

   The nineteenth wave of the ages rolls
      Now deathward since thy death and birth.
   Hast thou fed full menâs starved-out souls?
      Hast thou brought freedom upon earth?
   Or are there less oppressions done
   In this wild world under the sun?

   Nay, if indeed thou be not dead,
      Before thy terrene shrine be shaken,
   Look down, turn usward, bow thine head;
      O thou that wast of God forsaken,
   Look on thine household here, and see
   These that have not forsaken thee.

   Thy faith is fire upon their lips,
      Thy kingdom golden in their hands;
   They scourge us with thy words for whips,
      They brand us with thy words for brands;
   The thirst that made thy dry throat shrink
   To their moist mouths commends the drink.

   The toothÃ¨d thorns that bit thy brows
      Lighten the weight of gold on theirs;
   Thy nakedness enrobes thy spouse
      With the soft sanguine stuff she wears
   Whose old limbs use for ointment yet
   Thine agony and bloody sweat.

   The blinding buffets on thine head
      On their crowned heads confirm the crown;
   Thy scourging dyes their raiment red,
      And with thy bands they fasten down
   For burial in the blood-bought field
   The nations by thy stripes unhealed.

   With iron for thy linen bands
      And unclean cloths for winding-sheet
   They bind the peopleâs nail-pierced hands,
      They hide the peopleâs nail-pierced feet;
   And what man or what angel known
   Shall roll back the sepulchral stone?

   But these have not the rich manâs grave
      To sleep in when their pain is done.
   These were not fit for God to save.
      As naked hell-fire is the sun
   In their eyes living, and when dead
   These have not where to lay their head.

   They have no tomb to dig, and hide;
      Earth is not theirs, that they should sleep.
   On all these tombless crucified
      No loversâ eyes have time to weep.
   So still, for all manâs tears and creeds,
   The sacred body hangs and bleeds.

   Through the left hand a nail is driven,
      Faith, and another through the right,
   Forged in the fires of hell and heaven,
      Fear that puts out the eye of light:
   And the feet soiled and scarred and pale
   Are pierced with falsehood for a nail.

   And priests against the mouth divine
      Push their sponge full of poison yet
   And bitter blood for myrrh and wine,
      And on the same reed is it set
   Wherewith before they buffeted
   The peopleâs disanointed head.

   O sacred head, O desecrate,
      O labour-wounded feet and hands,
   O blood poured forth in pledge to fate
      Of nameless lives in divers lands,
   O slain and spent and sacrificed
   People, the grey-grown speechless Christ!

   Is there a gospel in the red
      Old witness of thy wide-mouthed wounds?
   From thy blind stricken tongueless head
      What desolate evangel sounds
   A hopeless note of hope deferred?
   What word, if there be any word?

   O son of man, beneath manâs feet
      Cast down, O common face of man
   Whereon all blows and buffets meet,
      O royal, O republican
   Face of the people bruised and dumb
   And longing till thy kingdom come!

   The soldiers and the high priests part
      Thy vesture: all thy days are priced,
   And all the nights that eat thine heart.
      And that one seamless coat of Christ,
   The freedom of the natural soul,
   They cast their lots for to keep whole.

   No fragment of it save the name
      They leave thee for a crown of scorns
   Wherewith to mock thy naked shame
      And forehead bitten through with thorns
   And, marked with sanguine sweat and tears,
   The stripes of eighteen hundred years

   And we seek yet if God or man
      Can loosen thee as Lazarus,
   Bid thee rise up republican
      And save thyself and all of us;
   But no discipleâs tongue can say
   When thou shalt take our sins away.

   And mouldering now and hoar with moss
      Between us and the sunlight swings
   The phantom of a Christless cross
      Shadowing the sheltered heads of kings
   And making with its moving shade
   The souls of harmless men afraid.

   It creaks and rocks to left and right
      Consumed of rottenness and rust,
   Worm-eaten of the worms of night,
      Dead as their spirits who put trust,
   Round its base muttering as they sit,
   In the time-cankered name of it.

   Thou, in the day that breaks thy prison,
      People, though these men take thy name,
   And hail and hymn thee rearisen,
      Who made songs erewhile of thy shame,
   Give thou not ear; for these are they
   Whose good day was thine evil day.

   Set not thine hand unto their cross.
      Give not thy soul up sacrificed.
   Change not the gold of faith for dross
      Of Christian creeds that spit on Christ.
   Let not thy tree of freedom be
   Regrafted from that rotting tree.

   This dead God here against my face
      Hath help for no man; who hath seen
   The good works of it, or such grace
      As thy grace in it, Nazarene,
   As that from thy live lips which ran
   For manâs sake, O thou son of man?

   The tree of faith ingraffed by priests
      Puts its foul foliage out above thee,
   And round it feed man-eating beasts
      Because of whom we dare not love thee;
   Though hearts reach back and memories ache,
   We cannot praise thee for their sake.

   O hidden face of man, whereover
      The years have woven a viewless veil,
   If thou wast verily manâs lover,
      What did thy love or blood avail?
   Thy blood the priests make poison of,
   And in gold shekels coin thy love.

   So when our souls look back to thee
      They sicken, seeing against thy side,
   Too foul to speak of or to see,
      The leprous likeness of a bride,
   Whose kissing lips through his lips grown
   Leave their God rotten to the bone.

   When we would see thee man, and know
      What heart thou hadst toward men indeed,
   Lo, thy blood-blackened altars; lo,
      The lips of priests that pray and feed
   While their own hellâs worm curls and licks
   The poison of the crucifix.

   Thou badâst let children come to thee;
      What children now but curses come?
   What manhood in that God can be
      Who sees their worship, and is dumb?
   No soul that lived, loved, wrought, and died,
   Is this their carrion crucified.

   Nay, if their God and thou be one,
      If thou and this thing be the same,
   Thou shouldst not look upon the sun;
      The sun grows haggard at thy name.
   Come down, be done with, cease, give oâer;
   Hide thyself, strive not, be no more.




TENEBRÃ


   AT the chill high tide of the night,
      At the turn of the fluctuant hours,
   When the waters of time are at height,
   In a vision arose on my sight
      The kingdoms of earth and the powers.

   In a dream without lightening of eyes
      I saw them, children of earth,
   Nations and races arise,
   Each one after his wise,
      Signed with the sign of his birth.

   Sound was none of their feet,
      Light was none of their faces;
   In their lips breath was not, or heat,
   But a subtle murmur and sweet
      As of water in wan waste places.

   Pale as from passionate years,
      Years unassuaged of desire,
   Sang they soft in mine ears,
   Crowned with jewels of tears,
      Girt with girdles of fire.

   A slow song beaten and broken,
      As it were from the dust and the dead,
   As of spirits athirst unsloken,
   As of things unspeakable spoken,
      As of tears unendurable shed.

   In the manifold sound remote,
      In the molten murmur of song,
   There was but a sharp sole note
   Alive on the night and afloat,
      The cry of the worldâs heartâs wrong.

   As the sea in the strait sea-caves,
      The sound came straitened and strange;
   A noise of the rending of graves,
   A tidal thunder of waves,
      The music of death and of change.

   âWe have waited so long,â they say,
      âFor a sound of the God, for a breath,
   For a ripple of the refluence of day,
   For the fresh bright wind of the fray,
      For the light of the sunrise of death.

   âWe have prayed not, we, to be strong,
      To fulfil the desire of our eyes;
   âHowbeit they have watched for it long,
   Watched, and the night did them wrong,
      Yet they say not of day, shall it rise?

   âThey are fearful and feeble with years,
      Yet they doubt not of day if it be;
   Yea, blinded and beaten with tears,
   Yea, sick with foresight of fears,
      Yet a little, and hardly, they see.

   âWe pray not, we, for the palm,
      For the fruit ingraffed of the fight,
   For the blossom of peace and the balm,
   And the tender triumph and calm
      Of crownless and weaponless right.

   âWe pray not, we, to behold
      The latter august new birth,
   The young dayâs purple and gold,
   And divine, and rerisen as of old,
      The sun-god Freedom on earth.

   âPeace, and worldâs honour, and fame,
      We have sought after none of these things;
   The light of a life like flame
   Passing, the storm of a name
      Shaking the strongholds of kings:

   âNor, fashioned of fire and of air,
      The splendour that burns on his head
   Who was chiefest in ages that were,
   Whose breath blew palaces bare,
      Whose eye shone tyrannies dead:

   âAll these things in your day
      Ye shall see, O our sons, and shall hold
   Surely; but we, in the grey
   Twilight, for one thing we pray,
      In that day though our memories be cold:

   âTo feel on our brows as we wait
      An air of the morning, a breath
   From the springs of the east, from the gate
   Whence freedom issues, and fate,
      Sorrow, and triumph, and death

   âFrom a land whereon time hath not trod,
      Where the spirit is bondless and bare,
   And the worldâs rein breaks, and the rod,
   And the soul of a man, which is God,
      He adores without altar or prayer:

   âFor alone of herself and her right
      She takes, and alone gives grace:
   And the colours of things lose light,
   And the forms, in the limitless white
      Splendour of space without space:

   âAnd the blossom of man from his tomb
      Yearns open, the flower that survives;
   And the shadows of changes consume
   In the colourless passionate bloom
      Of the live light made of our lives:

   âSeeing each life given is a leaf
      Of the manifold multiform flower,
   And the least among these, and the chief,
   As an ear in the red-ripe sheaf
      Stored for the harvesting hour.

   âO spirit of man, most holy,
      The measure of things and the root,
   In our summers and winters a lowly
   Seed, putting forth of them slowly
      Thy supreme blossom and fruit;

   âIn thy sacred and perfect year,
      The souls that were parcel of thee
   In the labour and life of us here
   Shall be rays of thy sovereign sphere,
      Springs of thy motion shall be.

   âThere is the fire that was man,
      The light that was love, and the breath
   That was hope ere deliverance began,
   And the wind that was life for a span,
      And the birth of new things, which is death

   âThere, whosoever had light,
      And, having, for menâs sake gave;
   All that warred against night;
   All that were found in the fight
      Swift to be slain and to save;

   âUndisbranched of the storms that disroot us,
      Of the lures that enthrall unenticed;
   The names that exalt and transmute us;
   The blood-bright splendour of Brutus,
      The snow-bright splendour of Christ.

   âThere all chains are undone;
      Day there seems but as night;
   Spirit and sense are as one
   In the light not of star nor of sun;
      Liberty there is the light.

   âShe, sole mother and maker,
      Stronger than sorrow, than strife;
   Deathless, though death overtake her;
   Faithful, though faith should forsake her;
      Spirit, and saviour, and life.â




HYMN OF MAN


          (DURING THE SESSION IN ROME OF THE ECUMENICAL COUNCIL)

   IN the grey beginning of years, in the twilight of things that began,
   The word of the earth in the ears of the world, was it God? was it
   man?
   The word of the earth to the spheres her sisters, the note of her
   song,
   The sound of her speech in the ears of the starry and sisterly throng,
   Was it praise or passion or prayer, was it love or devotion or dread,
   When the veils of the shining air first wrapt her jubilant head?
   When her eyes new-born of the night saw yet no star out of reach;
   When her maiden mouth was alight with the flame of musical speech;
   When her virgin feet were set on the terrible heavenly way,
   And her virginal lids were wet with the dew of the birth of the day:
   Eyes that had looked not on time, and ears that had heard not of
   death;
   Lips that had learnt not the rhyme of change and passionate breath,
   The rhythmic anguish of growth, and the motion of mutable things,
   Of love that longs and is loth, and plume-plucked hope without wings,
   Passions and pains without number, and life that runs and is lame,
   From slumber again to slumber, the same race set for the same,
   Where the runners outwear each other, but running with lampless hands
   No man takes light from his brother till blind at the goal he stands:
   Ah, did they know, did they dream of it, counting the cost and the
   worth?
   The ways of her days, did they seem then good to the new-souled earth?
   Did her heart rejoice, and the might of her spirit exult in her then,
   Child yet no child of the night, and motherless mother of men?
   Was it Love brake forth flower-fashion, a bird with gold on his wings,
   Lovely, her firstborn passion, and impulse of firstborn things?
   Was Love that nestling indeed that under the plumes of the night
   Was hatched and hidden as seed in the furrow, and brought forth
   bright?
   Was it Love lay shut in the shell world-shaped, having over him there
   Black world-wide wings that impel the might of the night through air?
   And bursting his shell as a bird, night shook through her
   sail-stretched vans,
   And her heart as a water was stirred, and its heat was the firstborn
   manâs.
   For the waste of the dead void air took form of a world at birth,
   And the waters and firmaments were, and light, and the life-giving
   earth.
   The beautiful bird unbegotten that night brought forth without pain
   In the fathomless years forgotten whereover the dead gods reign,
   Was it love, life, godhead, or fate? we say the spirit is one
   That moved on the dark to create out of darkness the stars and the
   sun.
   Before the growth was the grower, and the seed ere the plant was sown;
   But what was seed of the sower? and the grain of him, whence was it
   grown?
   Foot after foot ye go back and travail and make yourselves mad;
   Blind feet that feel for the track where highway is none to be had.
   Therefore the God that ye make you is grievous, and gives not aid,
   Because it is but for your sake that the God of your making is made.
   Thou and I and he are not gods made men for a span,
   But God, if a God there be, is the substance of men which is man.
   Our lives are as pulses or pores of his manifold body and breath;
   As waves of his sea on the shores where birth is the beacon of death.
   We men, the multiform features of man, whatsoever we be,
   Recreate him of whom we are creatures, and all we only are he.
   Not each man of all men is God, but God is the fruit of the whole;
   Indivisible spirit and blood, indiscernible body from soul.
   Not menâs but manâs is the glory of godhead, the kingdom of time,
   The mountainous ages made hoary with snows for the spirit to climb.
   A God with the world inwound whose clay to his footsole clings;
   A manifold God fast-bound as with iron of adverse things.
   A soul that labours and lives, an emotion, a strenuous breath,
   From the flame that its own mouth gives reillumed, and refreshed with
   death.
   In the sea whereof centuries are waves the live God plunges and swims;
   His bed is in all menâs graves, but the worm hath not hold on his
   limbs.
   Night puts out not his eyes, nor time sheds change on his head;
   With such fire as the stars of the skies are the roots of his heart
   are fed.
   Men are the thoughts passing through it, the veins that fulfil it with
   blood,
   With spirit of sense to renew it as springs fulfilling a flood.
   Men are the heartbeats of man, the plumes that feather his wings,
   Storm-worn, since being began, with the wind and thunder of things.
   Things are cruel and blind; their strength detains and deforms:
   And the wearying wings of the mind still beat up the stream of their
   storms.
   Still, as one swimming up stream, they strike out blind in the blast,
   In thunders of vision and dream, and lightnings of future and past.
   We are baffled and caught in the current and bruised upon edges of
   shoals;
   As weeds or as reeds in the torrent of things are the wind-shaken
   souls.
   Spirit by spirit goes under, a foam-bellâs bubble of breath,
   That blows and opens in sunder and blurs not the mirror of death.
   For a worm or a thorn in his path is a manâs soul quenched as a flame;
   For his lust of an hour or his wrath shall the worm and the man be the
   same.
   O God sore stricken of things! they have wrought him a raiment of
   pain;
   Can a God shut eyelids and wings at a touch on the nerves of the
   brain?
   O shamed and sorrowful God, whose force goes out at a blow!
   What world shall shake at his nod? at his coming what wilderness glow?
   What help in the work of his hands? what light in the track of his
   feet?
   His days are snowflakes or sands, with cold to consume him and heat.
   He is servant with Change for lord, and for wages he hath to his hire
   Folly and force, and a sword that devours, and a ravening fire.
   From the bed of his birth to his grave he is driven as a wind at their
   will;
   Lest Change bow down as his slave, and the storm and the sword be
   still;
   Lest earth spread open her wings to the sunward, and sing with the
   spheres;
   Lest man be master of things, to prevail on their forces and fears.
   By the spirit are things overcome; they are stark, and the spirit hath
   breath;
   It hath speech, and their forces are dumb; it is living, and things
   are of death.
   But they know not the spirit for master, they feel not force from
   above,
   While man makes love to disaster, and woos desolation with love.
   Yea, himself too hath made himself chains, and his own hands plucked
   out his eyes;
   For his own soul only constrains him, his own mouth only denies.
   The herds of kings and their hosts and the flocks of the high priests
   bow
   To a master whose face is a ghostâs; O thou that wast God, is it thou?
   Thou madest man in the garden; thou temptedst man, and he fell;
   Thou gavest him poison and pardon for blood and burnt-offering to
   sell.
   Thou hast sealed thine elect to salvation, fast locked with faith for
   the key;
   Make now for thyself expiation, and be thine atonement for thee.
   Ah, thou that darkenest heavenâah, thou that bringest a swordâ
   By the crimes of thine hands unforgiven they beseech thee to hear
   them, O Lord.
   By the balefires of ages that burn for thine incense, by creed and by
   rood,
   By the famine and passion that yearn and that hunger to find of thee
   food,
   By the children that asked at thy throne of the priests that were fat
   with thine hire
   For bread, and thou gavest a stone; for light, and thou madest them
   fire;
   By the kiss of thy peace like a snakeâs kiss, that leaves the soul
   rotten at root;
   By the savours of gibbets and stakes thou hast planted to bear to thee
   fruit;
   By torture and terror and treason, that make to thee weapons and
   wings;
   By thy power upon men for a season, made out of the malice of things;
   O thou that hast built thee a shrine of the madness of man and his
   shame,
   And hast hung in the midst for a sign of his worship the lamp of thy
   name;
   That hast shown him for heaven in a vision a void worldâs shadow and
   shell,
   And hast fed thy delight and derision with fire of belief as of hell;
   That hast fleshed on the souls that believe thee the fang of the
   death-worm fear,
   With anguish of dreams to deceive them whose faith cries out in thine
   ear;
   By the face of the spirit confounded before thee and humbled in dust,
   By the dread wherewith life was astounded and shamed out of sense of
   its trust,
   By the scourges of doubt and repentance that fell on the soul at thy
   nod,
   Thou art judged, O judge, and the sentence is gone forth against thee,
   O God.
   Thy slave that slept is awake; thy slave but slept for a span;
   Yea, man thy slave shall unmake thee, who made thee lord over man.
   For his face is set to the east, his feet on the past and its dead;
   The sun rearisen is his priest, and the heat thereof hallows his head.
   His eyes take part in the morning; his spirit out-sounding the sea
   Asks no more witness or warning from temple or tripod or tree.
   He hath set the centuries at union; the night is afraid at his name;
   Equal with life, in communion with death, he hath found them the same.
   Past the wall unsurmounted that bars out our vision with iron and fire
   He hath sent forth his soul for the stars to comply with and suns to
   conspire.
   His thought takes flight for the centre wherethrough it hath part in
   the whole;
   The abysses forbid it not enter: the stars make room for the soul.
   Space is the soulâs to inherit; the night is hers as the day;
   Lo, saith man, this is my spirit; how shall not the worlds make way?
   Space is thoughtâs, and the wonders thereof, and the secret of space;
   Is thought not more than the thunders and lightnings? shall thought
   give place?
   Is the body not more than the vesture, the life not more than the
   meat?
   The will than the word or the gesture, the heart than the hands or the
   feet?
   Is the tongue not more than the speech is? the head not more than the
   crown?
   And if higher than is heaven be the reach of the soul, shall not
   heaven bow down?
   Time, father of life, and more great than the life it begat and began,
   Earthâs keeper and heavenâs and their fate, lives, thinks, and hath
   substance in man.
   Timeâs motion that throbs in his blood is the thought that gives heart
   to the skies,
   And the springs of the fire that is food to the sunbeams are light to
   his eyes.
   The minutes that beat with his heart are the words to which worlds
   keep chime,
   And the thought in his pulses is part of the blood and the spirit of
   time.
   He saith to the ages, Give; and his soul foregoes not her share;
   Who are ye that forbid him to live, and would feed him with heavenlier
   air?
   Will ye feed him with poisonous dust, and restore him with hemlock for
   drink,
   Till he yield you his soul up in trust, and have heart not to know or
   to think?
   He hath stirred him, and found out the flaw in his fetters, and cast
   them behind;
   His soul to his soul is a law, and his mind is a light to his mind.
   The seal of his knowledge is sure, the truth and his spirit are wed;
   Men perish, but man shall endure; lives die, but the life is not dead.
   He hath sight of the secrets of season, the roots of the years and the
   fruits;
   His soul is at one with the reason of things that is sap to the roots.
   He can hear in their changes a sound as the conscience of consonant
   spheres;
   He can see through the years flowing round him the law lying under the
   years.
   Who are ye that would bind him with curses and blind him with vapour
   of prayer?
   Your might is as night that disperses when light is alive in the air.
   The bow of your godhead is broken, the arm of your conquest is stayed;
   Though ye call down God to bear token, for fear of you none is afraid.
   Will ye turn back times, and the courses of stars, and the season of
   souls?
   Shall Godâs breath dry up the sources that feed time full as it rolls?
   Nay, cry on him then till he show you a sign, till he lift up a rod;
   Hath he made not the nations to know him of old if indeed he be God?
   Is no heat of him left in the ashes of thousands burnt up for his
   sake?
   Can prayer not rekindle the flashes that shone in his face from the
   stake?
   Cry aloud; for your God is a God and a Saviour; cry, make yourselves
   lean;
   Is he drunk or asleep, that the rod of his wrath is unfelt and unseen?
   Is the fire of his old loving-kindness gone out, that his pyres are
   acold?
   Hath he gazed on himself unto blindness, who made men blind to behold?
   Cry out, for his kingdom is shaken; cry out, for the people blaspheme;
   Cry aloud till his godhead awaken; what doth he to sleep and to dream?
   Cry, cut yourselves, gash you with knives and with scourges, heap on
   to you dust;
   Is his life but as other godsâ lives? is not this the Lord God of your
   trust?
   Is not this the great God of your sires, that with souls and with
   bodies was fed,
   And the world was on flame with his fires?  O fools, he was God, and
   is dead.
   He will hear not again the strong crying of earth in his ears as
   before,
   And the fume of his multitudes dying shall flatter his nostrils no
   more.
   By the spirit he ruled as his slave is he slain who was mighty to
   slay,
   And the stone that is sealed on his grave he shall rise not and roll
   not away.
   Yea, weep to him, lift up your hands; be your eyes as a fountain of
   tears;
   Where he stood there is nothing that stands; if he call, there is no
   man that hears.
   He hath doffed his kingâs raiment of lies now the wane of his kingdom
   is come;
   Ears hath he, and hears not; and eyes, and he sees not; and mouth, and
   is dumb.
   His red kingâs raiment is ripped from him naked, his staff broken
   down;
   And the signs of his empire are stripped from him shuddering; and
   where is his crown?
   And in vain by the wellsprings refrozen ye cry for the warmth of his
   sunâ
   O God, the Lord God of thy chosen, thy will in thy kingdom be done.
   Kingdom and will hath he none in him left him, nor warmth in his
   breath;
   Till his corpse be cast out of the sun will ye know not the truth of
   his death?
   Surely, ye say, he is strong, though the times be against him and men;
   Yet a little, ye say, and how long, till he come to show judgment
   again?
   Shall God then die as the beasts die? who is it hath broken his rod?
   O God, Lord God of thy priests, rise up now and show thyself God.
   They cry out, thine elect, thine aspirants to heavenward, whose faith
   is as flame;
   O thou the Lord God of our tyrants, they call thee, their God, by thy
   name.
   By thy name that in hell-fire was written, and burned at the point of
   thy sword,
   Thou art smitten, thou God, thou art smitten; thy death is upon thee,
   O Lord.
   And the love-song of earth as thou diest resounds through the wind of
   her wingsâ
   Glory to Man in the highest! for Man is the master of things.




THE PILGRIMS


   WHO is your lady of love, O ye that pass
   Singing? and is it for sorrow of that which was
      That ye sing sadly, or dream of what shall be?
         For gladly at once and sadly it seems ye sing.
   âOur lady of love by you is unbeholden;
   For hands she hath none, nor eyes, nor lips, nor golden
      Treasure of hair, nor face nor form; but we
         That love, we know her more fair than anything.

   âIs she a queen, having great gifts to give?
   âYea, these; that whoso hath seen her shall not live
      Except he serve her sorrowing, with strange pain,
         Travail and bloodshedding and bitterer tears;
   And when she bids die he shall surely die.
   And he shall leave all things under the sky
      And go forth naked under sun and rain
         And work and wait and watch out all his years.

   âHath she on earth no place of habitation?
   âAge to age calling, nation answering nation,
      Cries out, Where is she? and there is none to say;
         For if she be not in the spirit of men,
   For if in the inward soul she hath no place,
   In vain they cry unto her, seeking her face,
      In vain their mouths make much of her; for they
         Cry with vain tongues, till the heart lives again.

   âO ye that follow, and have ye no repentance?
   For on your brows is written a mortal sentence,
      An hieroglyph of sorrow, a fiery sign,
         That in your lives ye shall not pause or rest,
   Nor have the sure sweet common love, nor keep
   Friends and safe days, nor joy of life nor sleep.
      âThese have we not, who have one thing, the divine
         Face and clear eyes of faith and fruitful breast.

   âAnd ye shall die before your thrones be won.
   âYea, and the changed world and the liberal sun
      Shall move and shine without us, and we lie
         Dead; but if she too move on earth and live,
   But if the old world with all the old irons rent
   Laugh and give thanks, shall we be not content?
      Nay, we shall rather live, we shall not die,
         Life being so little and death so good to give.

   âAnd these men shall forget you.âYea, but we
   Shall be a part of the earth and the ancient sea,
      And heaven-high air august, and awful fire,
         And all things good; and no manâs heart shall beat
   But somewhat in it of our blood once shed
   Shall quiver and quicken, as now in us the dead
      Blood of men slain and the old same lifeâs desire
         Plants in their fiery footprints our fresh feet.

   âBut ye that might be clothed with all things pleasant,
   Ye are foolish that put off the fair soft present,
      That clothe yourselves with the cold future air;
         When mother and father and tender sister and brother
   And the old live love that was shall be as ye,
   Dust, and no fruit of loving life shall be.
      âShe shall be yet who is more than all these were,
         Than sister or wife or father unto us or mother.

   âIs this worth life, is this, to win for wages?
   Lo, the dead mouths of the awful grey-grown ages,
      The venerable, in the past that is their prison,
         In the outer darkness, in the unopening grave,
   Laugh, knowing how many as ye now say have said,
   How many, and all are fallen, are fallen and dead:
      Shall ye dead rise, and these dead have not risen?
         âNot we but she, who is tender and swift to save

   âAre ye not weary and faint not by the way,
   Seeing night by night devoured of day by day,
      Seeing hour by hour consumed in sleepless fire?
         Sleepless: and ye too, when shall ye too sleep?
   âWe are weary in heart and head, in hands and feet,
   And surely more than all things sleep were sweet,
      Than all things save the inexorable desire
         Which whoso knoweth shall neither faint nor weep.

   âIs this so sweet that one were fain to follow?
   Is this so sure where all menâs hopes are hollow,
      Even this your dream, that by much tribulation
         Ye shall make whole flawed hearts, and bowed necks straight?
   âNay, though our life were blind, our death were fruitless,
   Not therefore were the whole worldâs high hope rootless;
      But man to man, nation would turn to nation,
         And the old life live, and the old great word be great.

   âPass on then and pass by us and let us be,
   For what light think ye after life to see?
      And if the world fare better will ye know?
         And if man triumph who shall seek you and say?
   âEnough of light is this for one lifeâs span,
   That all men born are mortal, but not man:
      And we men bring death lives by night to sow,
         That man may reap and eat and live by day.




ARMAND BARBÃS


I


   FIRE out of heaven, a flower of perfect fire,
      That where the roots of life are had its root
      And where the fruits of time are brought forth fruit;
   A faith made flesh, a visible desire,
   That heard the yet unbreathing years respire
      And speech break forth of centuries that sit mute
      Beyond all feebler footprint of pursuit;
   That touched the highest of hope, and went up higher;
   A heart love-wounded whereto love was law,
   A soul reproachless without fear or flaw,
      A shining spirit without shadow of shame,
   A memory made of all menâs love and awe;
      Being disembodied, so thou be the same,
      What need, O soul, to sign thee with thy name?



II


   All woes of all men sat upon thy soul
      And all their wrongs were heavy on thy head;
      With all their wounds thy heart was pierced and bled,
   And in thy spirit as in a mourning scroll
   The worldâs huge sorrows were inscribed by roll,
      All theirs on earth who serve and faint for bread,
      All banished menâs, all theirs in prison dead,
   Thy love had heart and sword-hand for the whole.
   âThis was my day of glory,â didst thou say,
   When, by the scaffold thou hadst hope to climb
   For thy faithâs sake, they brought thee respite; âNay,
   I shall not die then, I have missed my day.â
      O hero, O our help, O head sublime,
      Thy day shall be commensurate with time.




QUIA MULTUM AMAVIT


   AM I not he that hath made thee and begotten thee,
         I, God, the spirit of man?
   Wherefore now these eighteen years hast thou forgotten me,
         From whom thy life began?
   Thy life-blood and thy life-breath and thy beauty,
         Thy might of hands and feet,
   Thy soul made strong for divinity of duty
         And service which was sweet.
   Through the red sea brimmed with blood didst thou not follow me,
         As one that walks in trance?
   Was the storm strong to break or the sea to swallow thee,
         When thou wast free and France?
   I am Freedom, God and man, O France, that plead with thee;
         How long now shall I plead?
   Was I not with thee in travail, and in need with thee,
         Thy sore travail and need?
   Thou wast fairest and first of my virgin-vested daughters,
         Fairest and foremost thou;
   And thy breast was white, though thy hands were red with slaughters,
         Thy breast, a harlotâs now.
   O foolish virgin and fair among the fallen,
         A ruin where satyrs dance,
   A garden wasted for beasts to crawl and brawl in,
         What hast thou done with France?
   Where is she who bared her bosom but to thunder,
         Her brow to storm and flame,
   And before her face was the red sea cloven in sunder
         And all its waves made tame?
   And the surf wherein the broad-based rocks were shaking
         She saw far off divide,
   At the blast of the breath of the battle blown and breaking,
         And weight of wind and tide;
   And the ravin and the ruin of thronÃ¨d nations
         And every royal race,
   And the kingdoms and kings from the state of their high stations
         That fell before her face.
   Yea, great was the fall of them, all that rose against her,
         From the earthâs old-historied heights;
   For my hands were fire, and my wings as walls that fenced her,
         Mine eyes as pilot-lights.
   Not as guerdons given of kings the gifts I brought her,
         Not strengths that pass away;
   But my heart, my breath of life, O France, O daughter,
         I gave thee in that day.
   Yea, the heartâs blood of a very God I gave thee,
         Breathed in thy mouth his breath;
   Was my word as a manâs, having no more strength to save thee
         From this worse thing than death?
   Didst thou dream of it only, the day that I stood nigh thee,
         Was all its light a dream?
   When that iron surf roared backwards and went by thee
         Unscathed of storm or stream:
   When thy sons rose up and thy young men stood together,
         One equal face of fight,
   And my flag swam high as the swimming sea-foamâs feather,
         Laughing, a lamp of light?
   Ah the lordly laughter and light of it, that lightened
         Heaven-high, the heavenâs whole length!
   Ah the hearts of heroes pierced, the bright lips whitened
         Of strong men in their strength!
   Ah the banner-poles, the stretch of straightening streamers
         Straining their full reach out!
   Ah the menâs hands making true the dreams of dreamers,
         The hopes brought forth in doubt!
   Ah the noise of horse, the charge and thunder of drumming,
         And swaying and sweep of swords!
   Ah the light that led them through of the worldâs life coming,
         Clear of its lies and lords!
   By the lightning of the lips of guns whose flashes
         Made plain the strayed worldâs way;
   By the flame that left her dead old sins in ashes,
         Swept out of sight of day;
   By thy children whose bare feet were shod with thunder,
         Their bare hands mailed with fire;
   By the faith that went with them, waking fear and wonder,
         Heartâs love and high desire;
   By the tumult of the waves of nations waking
         Blind in the loud wide night;
   By the wind that went on the worldâs waste waters, making
         Their marble darkness white,
   As the flash of the flakes of the foam flared lamplike, leaping
         From wave to gladdening wave,
   Making wide the fast-shut eyes of thraldom sleeping
         The sleep of the unclean grave;
   By the fire of equality, terrible, devouring,
         Divine, that brought forth good;
   By the lands it purged and wasted and left flowering
         With bloom of brotherhood;
   By the lips of fraternity that for loveâs sake uttered
         Fierce words and fires of death,
   But the eyes were deep as loveâs, and the fierce lips fluttered
         With loveâs own living breath;
   By thy weaponed hands, brows helmed, and bare feet spurning
         The bared head of a king;
   By the storm of sunrise round thee risen and burning,
         Why hast thou done this thing?
   Thou hast mixed thy limbs with the son of a harlot, a stranger,
         Mouth to mouth, limb to limb,
   Thou, bride of a God, because of the bridesman Danger,
         To bring forth seed to him.
   For thou thoughtest inly, the terrible bridegroom wakes me,
         When I would sleep, to go;
   The fire of his mouth consumes, and the red kiss shakes me,
         More bitter than a blow.
   Rise up, my beloved, go forth to meet the stranger,
         Put forth thine arm, he saith;
   Fear thou not at all though the bridesman should be Danger,
         The bridesmaid should be Death.
   I the bridegroom, am I not with thee, O bridal nation,
         O wedded France, to strive?
   To destroy the sins of the earth with divine devastation,
         Till none be left alive?
   Lo her growths of sons, foliage of men and frondage,
         Broad boughs of the old-world tree,
   With iron of shame and with pruning-hooks of bondage
         They are shorn from sea to sea.
   Lo, I set wings to thy feet that have been wingless,
         Till the utter race be run;
   Till the priestless temples cry to the thrones made kingless,
         Are we not also undone?
   Till the immeasurable Republic arise and lighten
         Above these quick and dead,
   And her awful robes be changed, and her red robes whiten,
         Her warring-robes of red.
   But thou wouldst not, saying, I am weary and faint to follow,
         Let me lie down and rest;
   And hast sought out shame to sleep with, mire to wallow,
         Yea, a much fouler breast:
   And thine own hast made prostitute, sold and shamed and bared it,
         Thy bosom which was mine,
   And the bread of the word I gave thee hast soiled, and shared it
         Among these snakes and swine.
   As a harlot thou wast handled and polluted,
         Thy faith held light as foam,
   That thou sentest men thy sons, thy sons imbruted,
         To slay thine elder Rome.
   Therefore O harlot, I gave thee to the accurst one,
         By night to be defiled,
   To thy second shame, and a fouler than the first one,
         That got thee first with child.
   Yet I know thee turning back now to behold me,
         To bow thee and make thee bare,
   Not for sinâs sake but penitence, by my feet to hold me,
         And wipe them with thine hair.
   And sweet ointment of thy grief thou hast brought thy master,
      And set before thy lord,
   From a box of flawed and broken alabaster,
      Thy broken spirit, poured.
   And love-offerings, tears and perfumes, hast thou given me,
      To reach my feet and touch;
   Therefore thy sins, which are many, are forgiven thee,
      Because thou hast loved much.

                                                   18 _brumaire_, _an_ 78.




GENESIS


   IN the outer world that was before this earth,
      That was before all shape or space was born,
   Before the blind first hour of time had birth,
      Before night knew the moonlight or the morn;

   Yea, before any world had any light,
      Or anything called God or man drew breath,
   Slowly the strong sides of the heaving night
      Moved, and brought forth the strength of life and death.

   And the sad shapeless horror increate
      That was all things and one thing, without fruit,
   Limit, or law; where love was none, nor hate,
      Where no leaf came to blossom from no root;

   The very darkness that time knew not of,
      Nor God laid hand on, nor was man found there,
   Ceased, and was cloven in several shapes; above
      Light, and night under, and fire, earth, water, and air.

   Sunbeams and starbeams, and all coloured things,
      All forms and all similitudes began;
   And death, the shadow cast by lifeâs wide wings,
      And God, the shade cast by the soul of man.

   Then between shadow and substance, night and light,
      Then between birth and death, and deeds and days,
   The illimitable embrace and the amorous fight
      That of itself begets, bears, rears, and slays,

   The immortal war of mortal things that is
      Labour and life and growth and good and ill,
   The mild antiphonies that melt and kiss,
      The violent symphonies that meet and kill,

   All nature of all things began to be.
      But chiefliest in the spirit (beast or man,
   Planet of heaven or blossom of earth or sea)
      The divine contraries of life began.

   For the great labour of growth, being many, is one;
      One thing the white death and the ruddy birth;
   The invisible air and the all-beholden sun,
      And barren water and many-childed earth.

   And these things are made manifest in men
      From the beginning forth unto this day:
   Time writes and life records them, and again
      Death seals them lest the record pass away.

   For if death were not, then should growth not be,
      Change, nor the life of good nor evil things;
   Nor were there night at all nor light to see,
      Nor water of sweet nor water of bitter springs.

   For in each man and each year that is born
      Are sown the twin seeds of the strong twin powers;
   The white seed of the fruitful helpful morn,
      The black seed of the barren hurtful hours.

   And he that of the black seed eateth fruit,
      To him the savour as honey shall be sweet;
   And he in whom the white seed hath struck root,
      He shall have sorrow and trouble and tears for meat.

   And him whose lips the sweet fruit hath made red
      In the end men loathe and make his name a rod;
   And him whose mouth on the unsweet fruit hath fed
      In the end men follow and know for very God.

   And of these twain, the black seed and the white,
      All things come forth, endured of men and done;
   And still the day is great with child of night,
      And still the black night labours with the sun.

   And each man and each year that lives on earth
      Turns hither or thither, and hence or thence is fed;
   And as a man before was from his birth,
      So shall a man be after among the dead.




TO WALT WHITMAN IN AMERICA


   SEND but a song oversea for us,
      Heart of their hearts who are free,
   Heart of their singer, to be for us
      More than our singing can be;
   Ours, in the tempest at error,
   With no light but the twilight of terror;
      Send us a song oversea!

   Sweet-smelling of pine-leaves and grasses,
      And blown as a tree through and through
   With the winds of the keen mountain-passes,
      And tender as sun-smitten dew;
   Sharp-tongued as the winter that shakes
   The wastes of your limitless lakes,
      Wide-eyed as the sea-lineâs blue.

   O strong-winged soul with prophetic
      Lips hot with the bloodheats of song,
   With tremor of heartstrings magnetic,
      With thoughts as thunders in throng,
   With consonant ardours of chords
   That pierce menâs souls as with swords
      And hale them hearing along,

   Make us too music, to be with us
      As a word from a worldâs heart warm,
   To sail the dark as a sea with us,
      Full-sailed, outsinging the storm,
   A song to put fire in our ears
   Whose burning shall burn up tears,
      Whose sign bid battle reform;

   A note in the ranks of a clarion,
      A word in the wind of cheer,
   To consume as with lightning the carrion
      That makes time foul for us here;
   In the air that our dead things infest
   A blast of the breath of the west,
      Till east way as west way is clear.

   Out of the sun beyond sunset,
      From the evening whence morning shall be,
   With the rollers in measureless onset,
      With the van of the storming sea,
   With the world-wide wind, with the breath
   That breaks ships driven upon death,
      With the passion of all things free,

   With the sea-steeds footless and frantic,
      White myriads for death to bestride
   In the charge of the ruining Atlantic
      Where deaths by regiments ride,
   With clouds and clamours of waters,
   With a long note shriller than slaughterâs
      On the furrowless fields world-wide,

   With terror, with ardour and wonder,
      With the soul of the season that wakes
   When the weight of a whole yearâs thunder
      In the tidestream of autumn breaks,
   Let the flight of the wide-winged word
   Come over, come in and be heard,
      Take form and fire for our sakes.

   For a continent bloodless with travail
      Here toils and brawls as it can,
   And the web of it who shall unravel
      Of all that peer on the plan;
   Would fain grow men, but they grow not,
   And fain be free, but they know not
      One name for freedom and man?

   One name, not twain for division;
      One thing, not twain, from the birth;
   Spirit and substance and vision,
      Worth more than worship is worth;
   Unbeheld, unadored, undivined,
   The cause, the centre, the mind,
      The secret and sense of the earth.

   Here as a weakling in irons,
      Here as a weanling in bands,
   As a prey that the stake-net environs,
      Our life that we looked for stands;
   And the man-child naked and dear,
   Democracy, turns on us here
      Eyes trembling with tremulous hands

   It sees not what season shall bring to it
      Sweet fruit of its bitter desire;
   Few voices it hears yet sing to it,
      Few pulses of hearts reaspire;
   Foresees not time, nor forehears
   The noises of imminent years,
      Earthquake, and thunder, and fire:

   When crowned and weaponed and curbless
      It shall walk without helm or shield
   The bare burnt furrows and herbless
      Of warâs last flame-stricken field,
   Till godlike, equal with time,
   It stand in the sun sublime,
      In the godhead of man revealed.

   Round your people and over them
      Light like raiment is drawn,
   Close as a garment to cover them
      Wrought not of mail nor of lawn;
   Here, with hope hardly to wear,
   Naked nations and bare
      Swim, sink, strike out for the dawn.

   Chains are here, and a prison,
      Kings, and subjects, and shame;
   If the God upon you be arisen,
      How should our songs be the same?
   How, in confusion of change,
   How shall we sing, in a strange
      Land, songs praising his name?

   God is buried and dead to us,
      Even the spirit of earth,
   Freedom; so have they said to us,
      Some with mocking and mirth,
   Some with heartbreak and tears;
   And a God without eyes, without ears,
      Who shall sing of him, dead in the birth?

   The earth-god Freedom, the lonely
      Face lightening, the footprint unshod,
   Not as one man crucified only
      Nor scourged with but one lifeâs rod;
   The soul that is substance of nations,
   Reincarnate with fresh generations;
      The great god Man, which is God.

   But in weariest of years and obscurest
      Doth it live not at heart of all things,
   The one God and one spirit, a purest
      Life, fed from unstanchable springs?
   Within love, within hatred it is,
   And its seed in the stripe as the kiss,
      And in slaves is the germ, and in kings.

   Freedom we call it, for holier
      Name of the soulâs there is none;
   Surelier it labours if slowlier,
      Than the metres of star or of sun;
   Slowlier than life into breath,
   Surelier than time into death,
      It moves till its labour be done.

   Till the motion be done and the measure
      Circling through season and clime,
   Slumber and sorrow and pleasure,
      Vision of virtue and crime;
   Till consummate with conquering eyes,
   A soul disembodied, it rise
      From the body transfigured of time.

   Till it rise and remain and take station
      With the stars of the worlds that rejoice;
   Till the voice of its heartâs exultation
      Be as theirs an invariable voice;
   By no discord of evil estranged,
   By no pause, by no breach in it changed,
      By no clash in the chord of its choice.

   It is one with the worldâs generations,
      With the spirit, the star, and the sod;
   With the kingless and king-stricken nations,
      With the cross, and the chain, and the rod;
   The most high, the most secret, most lonely,
   The earth-soul Freedom, that only
      Lives, and that only is God.




CHRISTMAS ANTIPHONES


I
IN CHURCH


   THOU whose birth on earth
      Angels sang to men,
   While thy stars made mirth,
   Saviour, at thy birth,
      This day born again;

   As this night was bright
      With thy cradle-ray,
   Very light of light,
   Turn the wild worldâs night
      To thy perfect day.

   God whose feet made sweet
      Those wild ways they trod,
   From thy fragrant feet
   Staining field and street
      With the blood of God;

   God whose breast is rest
      In the time of strife,
   In thy secret breast
   Sheltering souls opprest
      From the heat of life;

   God whose eyes are skies
      Love-lit as with spheres
   By the lights that rise
   To thy watching eyes,
      OrbÃ¨d lights of tears;

   God whose heart hath part
      In all grief that is,
   Was not manâs the dart
   That went through thine heart,
      And the wound not his?

   Where the pale souls wail,
      Held in bonds of death,
   Where all spirits quail,
   Came thy Godhead pale
      Still from human breathâ

   Pale from life and strife,
      Wan with manhood, came
   Forth of mortal life,
   Pierced as with a knife,
      Scarred as with a flame.

   Thou the Word and Lord
      In all time and space
   Heard, beheld, adored,
   With all ages poured
      Forth before thy face,

   Lord, what worth in earth
      Drew thee down to die?
   What therein was worth,
   Lord, thy death and birth?
      What beneath thy sky?

   Light above all love
      By thy love was lit,
   And brought down the Dove
   Feathered from above
      With the wings of it.

   From the height of night,
      Was not thine the star
   That led forth with might
   By no worldly light
      Wise men from afar?

   Yet the wise menâs eyes
      Saw thee not more clear
   Than they saw thee rise
   Who in shepherdâs guise
      Drew as poor men near.

   Yet thy poor endure,
      And are with us yet;
   Be thy name a sure
   Refuge for thy poor
      Whom menâs eyes forget.

   Thou whose ways we praised,
      Clear alike and dark,
   Keep our works and ways
   This and all thy days
      Safe inside thine ark.

   Who shall keep thy sheep,
      Lord, and lose not one?
   Who save one shall keep,
   Lest the shepherds sleep?
      Who beside the Son?

   From the grave-deep wave,
      From the sword and flame,
   Thou, even thou, shalt save
   Souls of king and slave
      Only by thy Name.

   Light not born with morn
      Or her fires above,
   Jesus virgin-born,
   Held of men in scorn,
      Turn their scorn to love.

   Thou whose face gives grace
      As the sunâs doth heat,
   Let thy sunbright face
   Lighten time and space
      Here beneath thy feet.

   Bid our peace increase,
      Thou that madest morn;
   Bid oppressions cease;
   Bid the night be peace;
      Bid the day be born.



II
OUTSIDE CHURCH


   WE whose days and ways
      All the night makes dark,
   What day shall we praise
   Of these weary days
      That our life-drops mark?

   We whose mind is blind,
      Fed with hope of nought;
   Wastes of worn mankind,
   Without heart or mind,
      Without meat or thought;

   We with strife of life
      Worn till all life cease,
   Want, a whetted knife,
   Sharpening strife on strife,
      How should we love peace?

   Ye whose meat is sweet
      And your wine-cup red,
   Us beneath your feet
   Hunger grinds as wheat,
      Grinds to make you bread.

   Ye whose night is bright
      With soft rest and heat,
   Clothed like day with light,
   Us the naked night
      Slays from street to street.

   Hath your God no rod,
      That ye tread so light?
   Man on us as God,
   God as man hath trod,
      Trod us down with might.

   We that one by one
      Bleed from eitherâs rod.
   What for us hath done
   Man beneath the sun,
      What for us hath God?

   We whose blood is food
      Given your wealth to feed,
   From the Christless rood
   Red with no Godâs blood,
      But with manâs indeed;

   How shall we that see
      Nightlong overhead
   Life, the flowerless tree,
   Nailed whereon as we
      Were our fathers deadâ

   We whose ear can hear,
      Not whose tongue can name,
   Famine, ignorance, fear,
   Bleeding tear by tear
      Year by year of shame,

   Till the dry life die
      Out of bloodless breast,
   Out of beamless eye,
   Out of mouths that cry
      Till death feed with restâ

   How shall we as ye,
      Though ye bid us, pray?
   Though ye call, can we
   Hear you call, or see,
      Though ye show us day?

   We whose name is shame,
      We whose souls walk bare,
   Shall we call the same
   God as ye by name,
      Teach our lips your prayer?

   God, forgive and give,
      For His sake who died?
   Nay, for ours who live,
   How shall we forgive
      Thee, then, on our side?

   We whose right to light
      Heavenâs high noon denies,
   Whom the blind beams smite
   That for you shine bright,
      And but burn our eyes,

   With what dreams of beams
      Shall we build up day,
   At what sourceless streams
   Seek to drink in dreams
      Ere they pass away?

   In what street shall meet,
      At what market-place,
   Your feet and our feet,
   With one goal to greet,
      Having run one race?

   What one hope shall ope
      For us all as one
   One same horoscope,
   Where the soul sees hope
      That outburns the sun?

   At what shrine what wine,
      At what board what bread,
   Salt as blood or brine,
   Shall we share in sign
      How we poor were fed?

   In what hour what power
      Shall we pray for morn,
   If your perfect hour,
   When all day bears flower,
      Not for us is born?



III
BEYOND CHURCH


   YE that weep in sleep,
      Souls and bodies bound,
   Ye that all night keep
   Watch for change, and weep
      That no change is found;

   Ye that cry and die,
      And the world goes on
   Without ear or eye,
   And the days go by
      Till all days are gone;

   Man shall do for you,
      Men the sons of man,
   What no God would do
   That they sought unto
      While the blind years ran.

   Brotherhood of good,
      Equal laws and rights,
   Freedom, whose sweet food
   Feeds the multitude
      All their days and nights

   With the bread full-fed
      Of her body blest
   And the soulâs wine shed
   From her table spread
      Where the world is guest,

   Mingling me and thee,
      When like light of eyes
   Flashed through thee and me
   Truth shall make us free,
      Liberty make wise;

   These are they whom day
      Follows and gives light
   Whence they see to slay
   Night, and burn away
      All the seed of night.

   What of thine and mine,
      What of want and wealth,
   When one faith is wine
   For my heart and thine
      And one draught is health?

   For no sect elect
      Is the soulâs wine poured
   And her table decked;
   Whom should man reject
      From manâs common board?

   Gods refuse and choose,
      Grudge and sell and spare;
   None shall man refuse,
   None of all men lose,
      None leave out of care.

   No manâs might of sight
      Knows that hour before;
   No manâs hand hath might
   To put back that light
      For one hour the more.

   Not though all men call,
      Kneeling with void hands,
   Shall they see light fall
   Till it come for all
      Tribes of men and lands.

   No desire brings fire
      Down from heaven by prayer,
   Though manâs vain desire
   Hang faithâs wind-struck lyre
      Out in tuneless air.

   One hath breath and saith
      What the tune shall beâ
   Time, who puts his breath
   Into life and death,
      Into earth and sea.

   To and fro years flow,
      Fill their tides and ebb,
   As his fingers go
   Weaving to and fro
      One unfinished web.

   All the range of change
      Hath its bounds therein,
   All the lives that range
   All the byways strange
      Named of death or sin.

   Star from far to star
      Speaks, and white moons wake,
   Watchful from afar
   What the nightâs ways are
      For the morningâs sake.

   Many names and flames
      Pass and flash and fall,
   Night-begotten names,
   And the night reclaims,
      As she bare them, all.

   But the sun is one,
      And the sunâs name Right;
   And when light is none
   Saving of the sun,
      All men shall have light.

   All shall see and be
      Parcel of the morn;
   Ay, though blind were we,
   None shall choose but see
      When that day is born.




A NEW YEARâS MESSAGE


                            TO JOSEPH MAZZINI

    Send the stars light, but send not love to me.

                                                                _Shelley_.



I


   OUT of the dawning heavens that hear
   Young wings and feet of the new year
   Move through their twilight, and shed round
   Soft showers of sound,
   Soothing the season with sweet rain,
   If greeting come to make me fain,
   What is it I can send again?



2


   I know not if the year shall send
   Tidings to usward as a friend,
   And salutation, and such things
   Bear on his wings
   As the soul turns and thirsts unto
   With hungering eyes and lips that sue
   For that sweet food which makes all new.



3


   I know not if his light shall be
   Darkness, or else light verily:
   I know but that it will not part
   Heartâs faith from heart,
   Truth from the trust in truth, nor hope
   From sight of days unscaled that ope
   Beyond one poor yearâs horoscope.



4


   That faith in love which loveâs self gives,
   O master of my spirit, lives,
   Having in presence unremoved
   Thine head beloved,
   The shadow of thee, the semitone
   Of thy voice heard at heart and known,
   The light of thee not set nor flown.



5


   Seas, lands, and hours, can these divide
   Love from loveâs service, side from side,
   Though no sound pass nor breath be heard
   Of one good word?
   To send back words of trust to thee
   Were to send wings to love, when he
   With his own strong wings covers me.



6


   Who shall teach singing to the spheres,
   Or motion to the flight of years?
   Let soul with soul keep hand in hand
   And understand,
   As in one same abiding-place
   We keep one watch for one same face
   To rise in some short sacred space.



7


   And all space midway is but nought
   To keep true heart from faithful thought,
   As under twilight stars we wait
   By Timeâs shut gate
   Till the slow soundless hinges turn,
   And through the depth of years that yearn
   The face of the Republic burn.

1870.




MATER DOLOROSA


    Citoyen, lui dit Enjoiras, ma mÃ¨re, câest la RÃ©publique.

                                                         _Les MisÃ©rables_.

   WHO is this that sits by the way, by the wild wayside,
   In a rent stained raiment, the robe of a cast-off bride,
   In the dust, in the rainfall sitting, with soiled feet bare,
   With the night for a garment upon her, with torn wet hair?
   She is fairer of face than the daughters of men, and her eyes,
   Worn through with her tears, are deep as the depth of skies.

   This is she for whose sake being fallen, for whose abject sake,
   Earth groans in the blackness of darkness, and menâs hearts break.
   This is she for whose love, having seen her, the men that were
   Poured life out as water, and shed their souls upon air.
   This is she for whose glory their years were counted as foam;
   Whose face was a light upon Greece, was a fire upon Rome.

   Is it now not surely a vain thing, a foolish and vain,
   To sit down by her, mourn to her, serve her, partake in the pain?
   She is grey with the dust of time on his manifold ways,
   Where her faint feet stumble and falter through year-long days.
   Shall she help us at all, O fools, give fruit or give fame,
   Who herself is a name despised, a rejected name?

   We have not served her for guerdon.  If any do so,
   That his mouth may be sweet with such honey, we care not to know.
   We have drunk from a wine-unsweetened, a perilous cup,
   A draught very bitter.  The kings of the earth stood up,
   And the rulers took counsel together, to smite her and slay;
   And the blood of her wounds is given us to drink today.

   Can these bones live? or the leaves that are dead leaves bud?
   Or the dead blood drawn from her veins be in your veins blood?
   Will ye gather up water again that was drawn and shed?
   In the blood is the life of the veins, and her veins are dead.
   For the lives that are over are over, and past things past;
   She had her day, and it is not; was first, and is last.

   Is it nothing unto you then, all ye that pass by,
   If her breath be left in her lips, if she live now or die?
   Behold now, O people, and say if she be not fair,
   Whom your fathers followed to find her, with praise and prayer,
   And rejoiced, having found her, though roof they had none nor bread;
   But ye care not; what is it to you if her day be dead?

   It was well with our fathers; their sound was in all menâs lands;
   There was fire in their hearts, and the hunger of fight in their
   hands.
   Naked and strong they went forth in her strength like flame,
   For her loveâs and her nameâs sake of old, her republican name.
   But their children, by kings made quiet, by priests made wise,
   Love better the heat of their hearths than the light of her eyes.

   Are they children of these thy children indeed, who have sold,
   O golden goddess, the light of thy face for gold?
   Are they sons indeed of the sons of thy dayspring of hope,
   Whose lives are in fief of an emperor, whose souls of a Pope?
   Hide then thine head, O belovÃ¨d; thy time is done;
   Thy kingdom is broken in heaven, and blind thy sun.

   What sleep is upon you, to dream she indeed shall rise,
   When the hopes are dead in her heart as the tears in her eyes?
   If ye sing of her dead, will she stir? if ye weep for her, weep?
   Come away now, leave her; what hath she to do but sleep?
   But ye that mourn are alive, and have years to be;
   And life is good, and the world is wiser than we.

   Yea, wise is the world and mighty, with years to give,
   And years to promise; but how long now shall it live?
   And foolish and poor is faith, and her ways are bare,
   Till she find the way of the sun, and the morning air.
   In that hour shall this dead face shine as the face of the sun,
   And the soul of man and her soul and the worldâs be one.




MATER TRIUMPHALIS


   MOTHER of manâs time-travelling generations,
      Breath of his nostrils, heartblood of his heart,
   God above all Gods worshipped of all nations,
      Light above light, law beyond law, thou art.

   Thy face is as a sword smiting in sunder
      Shadows and chains and dreams and iron things;
   The sea is dumb before thy face, the thunder
      Silent, the skies are narrower than thy wings.

   Angels and Gods, spirit and sense, thou takest
      In thy right hand as drops of dust or dew;
   The temples and the towers of time thou breakest,
      His thoughts and words and works, to make them new.

   All we have wandered from thy ways, have hidden
      Eyes from thy glory and ears from calls they heard;
   Called of thy trumpets vainly, called and chidden,
      Scourged of thy speech and wounded of thy word.

   We have known thee and have not known thee; stood beside thee,
      Felt thy lips breathe, set foot where thy feet trod,
   Loved and renounced and worshipped and denied thee,
      As though thou wert but as another God,

   âOne hour for sleep,â we said, âand yet one other;
      All day we served her, and who shall serve by night?â
   Not knowing of thee, thy face not knowing, O mother,
      O light wherethrough the darkness is as light.

   Men that forsook thee hast thou not forsaken,
      Races of men that knew not hast thou known;
   Nations that slept thou hast doubted not to waken,
      Worshippers of strange Gods to make thine own.

   All old grey histories hiding thy clear features,
      O secret spirit and sovereign, all menâs tales,
   Creeds woven of men thy children and thy creatures,
      They have woven for vestures of thee and for veils.

   Thine hands, without election or exemption,
      Feed all men fainting from false peace or strife,
   O thou, the resurrection and redemption,
      The godhead and the manhood and the life.

   Thy wings shadow the waters; thine eyes lighten
      The horror of the hollows of the night;
   The depths of the earth and the dark places brighten
      Under thy feet, whiter than fire is white.

   Death is subdued to thee, and hellâs bands broken;
      Where thou art only is heaven; who hears not thee,
   Time shall not hear him; when menâs names are spoken,
      A nameless sign of death shall his name be.

   Deathless shall be the death, the name be nameless;
      Sterile of stars his twilight time of breath;
   With fire of hell shall shame consume him shameless,
      And dying, all the night darken his death.

   The years are as thy garments, the worldâs ages
      As sandals bound and loosed from thy swift feet;
   Time serves before thee, as one that hath for wages
      Praise or shame only, bitter words or sweet.

   Thou sayest âWell done,â and all a century kindles;
      Again thou sayest âDepart from sight of me,â
   And all the light of face of all men dwindles,
      And the age is as the broken glass of thee.

   The night is as a seal set on menâs faces,
      On faces fallen of men that take no light,
   Nor give light in the deeps of the dark places,
      Blind things, incorporate with the body of night.

   Their souls are serpents winterbound and frozen,
      Their shame is as a tame beast, at their feet
   Couched; their cold lips deride thee and thy chosen,
      Their lying lips made grey with dust for meat.

   Then when their time is full and days run over,
      The splendour of thy sudden brow made bare
   Darkens the morning; thy bared hands uncover
      The veils of light and night and the awful air.

   And the world naked as a new-born maiden
      Stands virginal and splendid as at birth,
   With all thine heaven of all its light unladen,
      Of all its love unburdened all thine earth.

   For the utter earth and the utter air of heaven
      And the extreme depth is thine and the extreme height;
   Shadows of things and veils of ages riven
      Are as menâs kings unkingdomed in thy sight.

   Through the iron years, the centuries brazen-gated,
      By the agesâ barred impenetrable doors,
   From the evening to the morning have we waited,
      Should thy foot haply sound on the awful floors.

   The floors untrodden of the sunâs feet glimmer,
      The star-unstricken pavements of the night;
   Do the lights burn inside? the lights wax dimmer
      On festal faces withering out of sight.

   The crowned heads lose the light on them; it may be
      Dawn is at hand to smite the loud feast dumb;
   To blind the torch-lit centuries till the day be,
      The feasting kingdoms till thy kingdom come.

   Shall it not come? deny they or dissemble,
      Is it not even as lightning from on high
   Now? and though many a soul close eyes and tremble,
      How should they tremble at all who love thee as I?

   I am thine harp between thine hands, O mother!
      All my strong chords are strained with love of thee.
   We grapple in love and wrestle, as each with other
      Wrestle the wind and the unreluctant sea.

   I am no courtier of thee sober-suited,
      Who loves a little for a little pay.
   Me not thy winds and storms nor thrones disrooted
      Nor molten crowns nor thine own sins dismay.

   Sinned hast thou sometime, therefore art thou sinless;
      Stained hast thou been, who art therefore without stain;
   Even as manâs soul is kin to thee, but kinless
      Thou, in whose womb Time sows the all-various grain.

   I do not bid thee spare me, O dreadful mother!
      I pray thee that thou spare not, of thy grace.
   How were it with me then, if ever another
      Should come to stand before thee in this my place?

   I am the trumpet at thy lips, thy clarion
      Full of thy cry, sonorous with thy breath;
   The graves of souls born worms and creeds grown carrion
      Thy blast of judgment fills with fires of death.

   Thou art the player whose organ-keys are thunders,
      And I beneath thy foot the pedal prest;
   Thou art the ray whereat the rent night sunders,
      And I the cloudlet borne upon thy breast.

   I shall burn up before thee, pass and perish,
      As haze in sunrise on the red sea-line;
   But thou from dawn to sunsetting shalt cherish
      The thoughts that led and souls that lighted mine.

   Reared between night and noon and truth and error,
      Each twilight-travelling bird that trills and screams
   Sickens at midday, nor can face for terror
      The imperious heavenâs inevitable extremes.

   I have no spirit of skill with equal fingers
      At sign to sharpen or to slacken strings;
   I keep no time of song with gold-perched singers
      And chirp of linnets on the wrists of kings.

   I am thy storm-thrush of the days that darken,
      Thy petrel in the foam that bears thy bark
   To port through night and tempest; if thou hearken,
      My voice is in thy heaven before the lark.

   My song is in the mist that hides thy morning,
      My cry is up before the day for thee;
   I have heard thee and beheld thee and give warning,
      Before thy wheels divide the sky and sea.

   Birds shall wake with thee voiced and feathered fairer,
      To see in summer what I see in spring;
   I have eyes and heart to endure thee, O thunder-bearer,
      And they shall be who shall have tongues to sing.

   I have love at least, and have not fear, and part not
      From thine unnavigable and wingless way;
   Thou tarriest, and I have not said thou art not,
      Nor all thy night long have denied thy day.

   Darkness to daylight shall lift up thy pÃ¦an,
      Hill to hill thunder, vale cry back to vale,
   With wind-notes as of eagles Ãschylean,
      And Sappho singing in the nightingale.

   Sung to by mighty sons of dawn and daughters,
      Of this nightâs songs thine ear shall keep but one;
   That supreme song which shook the channelled waters,
      And called thee skyward as God calls the sun.

   Come, though all heaven again be fire above thee;
      Though death before thee come to clear thy sky;
   Let us but see in his thy face who love thee;
      Yea, though thou slay us, arise and let us die.




A MARCHING SONG


         WE mix from many lands,
            We march for very far;
         In hearts and lips and hands
            Our staffs and weapons are;
   The light we walk in darkens sun and moon and star.

         It doth not flame and wane
            With years and spheres that roll,
         Storm cannot shake nor stain
            The strength that makes it whole,
   The fire that moulds and moves it of the sovereign soul.

         We are they that have to cope
            With time till time retire;
         We live on hopeless hope,
            We feed on tears and fire;
   Time, foot by foot, gives back before our sheer desire.

         From the edge of harsh derision,
            From discord and defeat,
         From doubt and lame division,
            We pluck the fruit and eat;
   And the mouth finds it bitter, and the spirit sweet.

         We strive with time at wrestling
            Till time be on our side
         And hope, our plumeless nestling,
            A full-fledged eaglet ride
   Down the loud length of storm its windward wings divide.

         We are girt with our belief,
            Clothed with our will and crowned;
         Hope, fear, delight, and grief,
            Before our will give ground;
   Their calls are in our ears as shadows of dead sound.

         All but the heart forsakes us,
            All fails us but the will;
         Keen treason tracks and takes us
            In pits for blood to fill;
   Friend falls from friend, and faith for faith lays wait to kill.

         Out under moon and stars
            And shafts of the urgent sun
         Whose face on prison-bars
            And mountain-heads is one,
   Our march is everlasting till timeâs march be done.

         Whither we know, and whence,
            And dare not care wherethrough.
         Desires that urge the sense,
            Fears changing old with new,
   Perils and pains beset the ways we press into;

         Earth gives us thorns to tread,
            And all her thorns are trod;
         Through lands burnt black and red
            We pass with feet unshod;
   Whence we would be man shall not keep us, nor manâs God.

         Through the great desert beasts
            Howl at our backs by night,
         And thunder-forging priests
            Blow their dead bale-fires bright,
   And on their broken anvils beat out bolts for fight.

         Inside their sacred smithies
            Though hot the hammer rings,
         Their steel links snap like withies,
            Their chains like twisted strings,
   Their surest fetters are as plighted words of kings.

         O nations undivided,
            O single people and free,
         We dreamers, we derided,
            We mad blind men that see,
   We bear you witness ere ye come that ye shall be.

         Ye sitting among tombs,
            Ye standing round the gate,
         Whom fire-mouthed war consumes,
            Or cold-lipped peace bids wait,
   All tombs and bars shall open, every grave and grate.

         The locks shall burst in sunder,
            The hinges shrieking spin,
         When time, whose hand is thunder,
            Lays hand upon the pin,
   And shoots the bolts reluctant, bidding all men in.

         These eyeless times and earless,
            Shall these not see and hear,
         And all their hearts burn fearless
            That were afrost for fear?
   Is day not hard upon us, yea, not our day near?

         France! from its grey dejection
            Make manifest the red
         Tempestuous resurrection
            Of thy most sacred head!
   Break thou the covering cerecloths; rise up from the dead.

         And thou, whom sea-walls sever
            From lands unwalled with seas,
         Wilt thou endure for ever,
            O Miltonâs England, these?
   Thou that wast his Republic, wilt thou clasp their knees?

         These royalties rust-eaten,
            These worm-corroded lies,
         That keep thine head storm-beaten
            And sunlike strength of eyes
   From the open heaven and air of intercepted skies;

         These princelings with gauze winglets
            That buzz in the air unfurled,
         These summer-swarming kinglets,
            These thin worms crowned and curled,
   That bask and blink and warm themselves about the world;

         These fanged meridian vermin,
            Shrill gnats that crowd the dusk,
         Night-moths whose nestling ermine
            Smells foul of mould and musk,
   Blind flesh-flies hatched by dark and hampered in their husk;

         These honours without honour,
            These ghost-like gods of gold,
         This earth that wears upon her
            To keep her heart from cold
   No memory more of men that brought it fire of old;

         These limbs, supine, unbuckled,
            In rottenness of rest,
         These sleepy lips blood-suckled
            And satiate of thy breast,
   These dull wide mouths that drain thee dry and call thee blest;

         These masters of thee mindless
            That wear thee out of mind,
         These children of thee kindless
            That use thee out of kind,
   Whose hands strew gold before thee and contempt behind;

         Who have turned thy name to laughter,
            Thy sea-like sounded name
         That now none hearkens after
            For faith in its free fame,
   Who have robbed thee of thy trust and given thee of their shame;

         These hours that mock each other,
            These years that kill and die,
         Are these thy gains, our mother,
            For all thy gains thrown by?
   Is this that end whose promise made thine heart so high?

         With empire and with treason
            The first right hand made fast,
         But in manâs nobler season
            To put forth help the last,
   Love turns from thee, and memory disavows thy past.

         Lest thine own sea disclaim thee,
            Lest thine own sons despise,
         Lest lips shoot out that name thee
            And seeing thee men shut eyes,
   Take thought with all thy people, turn thine head and rise.

         Turn thee, lift up thy face;
            What ails thee to be dead?
         Ask of thyself for grace,
            Seek of thyself for bread,
   And who shall starve or shame thee, blind or bruise thine head?

         The same sun in thy sight,
            The same sea in thine ears,
         That saw thine hour at height,
            That sang thy song of years,
   Behold and hearken for thee, knowing thy hopes and fears.

         O people, O perfect nation,
            O England that shall be,
         How long till thou take station?
            How long till thralls live free?
   How long till all thy soul be one with all thy sea?

         Ye that from south to north,
            Ye that from east to west,
         Stretch hands of longing forth
            And keep your eyes from rest,
   Lo, when ye will, we bring you gifts of what is best.

         From the awful northland pines
            That skirt their wan dim seas
         To the ardent Apennines
            And sun-struck Pyrenees,
   One frost on all their frondage bites the blossoming trees.

         The leaves look up for light,
            For heat of helpful air;
         The trees of oldest height
            And thin storm-shaken hair
   Seek with gaunt hands up heavenward if the sun be there.

         The woods where souls walk lonely,
            The forests girt with night,
         Desire the day-star only
            And firstlings of the light
   Not seen of slaves nor shining in their mastersâ sight.

         We have the morning star,
            O foolish people, O kings!
         With us the day-springs are,
            Even all the fresh day-springs;
   For us, and with us, all the multitudes of things.

         O sorrowing hearts of slaves,
            We heard you beat from far!
         We bring the light that saves,
            We bring the morning star;
   Freedomâs good things we bring you, whence all good things are.

         With us the winds and fountains
            And lightnings live in tune;
         The morning-coloured mountains
            That burn into the noon,
   The mistâs mild veil on valleys muffled from the moon:

         The thunder-darkened highlands
            And lowlands hot with fruit,
         Sea-bays and shoals and islands,
            And cliffs that foil manâs foot,
   And all the flower of large-limbed life and all the root:

         The clangour of sea-eagles
            That teach the morning mirth
         With baying of heavenâs beagles
            That seek their prey on earth,
   By sounding strait and channel, gulf and reach and firth.

         With us the fields and rivers,
            The grass that summer thrills,
         The haze where morning quivers,
            The peace at heart of hills,
   The sense that kindles nature, and the soul that fills.

         With us all natural sights,
            All notes of natural scale;
         With us the starry lights;
            With us the nightingale;
   With us the heart and secret of the worldly tale.

         The strife of things and beauty,
            The fire and light adored,
         Truth, and life-lightening duty,
            Love without crown or sword,
   That by his might and godhead makes man god and lord.

         These have we, these are ours,
            That no priests give nor kings;
         The honey of all these flowers,
            The heart of all these springs;
   Ours, for where freedom lives not, there live no good things.

         Rise, ere the dawn be risen;
            Come, and be all souls fed;
         From field and street and prison
            Come, for the feast is spread;
   Live, for the truth is living; wake, for night is dead.




SIENA


   INSIDE this northern summerâs fold
   The fields are full of naked gold,
   Broadcast from heaven on lands it loves;
   The green veiled air is full of doves;
   Soft leaves that sift the sunbeams let
   Light on the small warm grasses wet
   Fall in short broken kisses sweet,
   And break again like waves that beat
   Round the sunâs feet.

   But I, for all this English mirth
   Of golden-shod and dancing days,
   And the old green-girt sweet-hearted earth,
   Desire what here no spells can raise.
   Far hence, with holier heavens above,
   The lovely city of my love
   Bathes deep in the sun-satiate air
   That flows round no fair thing more fair
   Her beauty bare.

   There the utter sky is holier, there
   More pure the intense white height of air,
   More clear menâs eyes that mine would meet,
   And the sweet springs of things more sweet.
   There for this one warm note of doves
   A clamour of a thousand loves
   Storms the nightâs ear, the dayâs assails,
   From the tempestuous nightingales,
   And fills, and fails.

   O gracious city well-beloved,
      Italian, and a maiden crowned,
   Siena, my feet are no more moved
      Toward thy strange-shapen mountain-bound:
   But my heart in me turns and moves,
   O lady loveliest of my loves,
   Toward thee, to lie before thy feet
   And gaze from thy fair fountain-seat
   Up the sheer street;

   And the house midway hanging see
   That saw Saint Catherine bodily,
   Felt on its floors her sweet feet move,
   And the live light of fiery love
   Burn from her beautiful strange face,
   As in the sanguine sacred place
   Where in pure hands she took the head
   Severed, and with pure lips still red
   Kissed the lips dead.

   For years through, sweetest of the saints,
      In quiet without cease she wrought,
   Till cries of men and fierce complaints
      From outward moved her maiden thought;
   And prayers she heard and sighs toward France,
   âGod, send us back deliverance,
   Send back thy servant, lest we die!â
   With an exceeding bitter cry
   They smote the sky.

   Then in her sacred saving hands
   She took the sorrows of the lands,
   With maiden palms she lifted up
   The sick timeâs blood-embittered cup,
   And in her virgin garment furled
   The faint limbs of a wounded world.
   Clothed with calm love and clear desire,
   She went forth in her soulâs attire,
   A missive fire.

   Across the might of men that strove
      It shone, and over heads of kings;
   And molten in red flames of love
      Were swords and many monstrous things;
   And shields were lowered, and snapt were spears,
   And sweeter-tuned the clamorous years;
   And faith came back, and peace, that were
   Fled; for she bade, saying, âThou, Godâs heir,
   Hast thou no care?

   âLo, men lay waste thine heritage
   Still, and much heathen people rage
   Against thee, and devise vain things.
   What comfort in the face of kings,
   What counsel is there?  Turn thine eyes
   And thine heart from them in like wise;
   Turn thee unto thine holy place
   To help us that of God for grace
   Require thy face.

   âFor who shall hear us if not thou
      In a strange land? what doest thou there?
   Thy sheep are spoiled, and the ploughers plough
      Upon us; why hast thou no care
   For all this, and beyond strange hills
   Liest unregardful what snow chills
   Thy foldless flock, or what rains beat?
   Lo, in thine ears, before thy feet,
   Thy lost sheep bleat.

   âAnd strange men feed on faultless lives,
   And there is blood, and men put knives,
   Shepherd, unto the young lambâs throat;
   And one hath eaten, and one smote,
   And one had hunger and is fed
   Full of the flesh of these, and red
   With blood of these as who drinks wine
   And God knoweth, who hath sent thee a sign,
   If these were thine.â

   But the Popeâs heart within him burned,
      So that he rose up, seeing the sign,
   And came among them; but she turned
      Back to her daily way divine,
   And fed her faith with silent things,
   And lived her life with curbed white wings,
   And mixed herself with heaven and died:
   And now on the sheer city-side
   Smiles like a bride.

   You see her in the fresh clear gloom,
   Where walls shut out the flame and bloom
   Of full-breathed summer, and the roof
   Keeps the keen ardent air aloof
   And sweet weight of the violent sky:
   There bodily beheld on high,
   She seems as one hearing in tune
   Heaven within heaven, at heavenâs full noon,
   In sacred swoon:

   A solemn swoon of sense that aches
      With imminent blind heat of heaven,
   While all the wide-eyed spirit wakes,
      Vigilant of the supreme Seven,
   Whose choral flames in Godâs sight move,
   Made unendurable with love,
   That without wind or blast of breath
   Compels all things through life and death
   Whither God saith.

   There on the dim side-chapel wall
   Thy mighty touch memorial,
   Razzi, raised up, for ages dead,
   And fixed for us her heavenly head:
   And, rent with plaited thorn and rod,
   Bared the live likeness of her God
   To menâs eyes turning from strange lands,
   Where, pale from thine immortal hands,
   Christ wounded stands;

   And the blood blots his holy hair
      And white brows over hungering eyes
   That plead against us, and the fair
      Mute lips forlorn of words or sighs
   In the great torment that bends down
   His bruised head with the bloomless crown,
   White as the unfruitful thorn-flower,
   A God beheld in dreams that were
   Beheld of her.

   In vain on all these sins and years
   Falls the sad blood, fall the slow tears;
   In vain poured forth as watersprings,
   Priests, on your altars, and ye, kings,
   About your seats of sanguine gold;
   Still your God, spat upon and sold,
   Bleeds at your hands; but now is gone
   All his flock from him saving one;
   Judas alone.

   Surely your race it was that he,
      O men signed backward with his name,
   Beholding in Gethsemane
      Bled the red bitter sweat of shame,
   Knowing how the word of Christian should
   Mean to men evil and not good,
   Seem to men shameful for your sake,
   Whose lips, for all the prayers they make,
   Manâs blood must slake.

   But blood nor tears ye love not, you
   That my love leads my longing to,
   Fair as the worldâs old faith of flowers,
   O golden goddesses of ours!
   From what Idalian rose-pleasance
   Hath Aphrodite bidden glance
   The lovelier lightnings of your feet?
   From what sweet Paphian sward or seat
   Led you more sweet?

   O white three sisters, three as one,
      With flowerlike arms for flowery bands
   Your linked limbs glitter like the sun,
      And time lies beaten at your hands.
   Time and wild years and wars and men
   Pass, and ye care not whence or when;
   With calm lips over sweet for scorn,
   Ye watch night pass, O children born
   Of the old-world morn.

   Ah, in this strange and shrineless place,
   What doth a goddess, what a Grace,
   Where no Greek worships her shrined limbs
   With wreaths and Cytherean hymns?
   Where no lute makes luxurious
   The adoring airs in Amathus,
   Till the maid, knowing her mother near,
   Sobs with love, aching with sweet fear?
   What do ye here?

   For the outer land is sad, and wears
      A raiment of a flaming fire;
   And the fierce fruitless mountain stairs
      Climb, yet seem wroth and loth to aspire,
   Climb, and break, and are broken down,
   And through their clefts and crests the town
   Looks west and sees the dead sun lie,
   In sanguine death that stains the sky
   With angry dye.

   And from the war-worn wastes without
   In twilight, in the time of doubt,
   One sound comes of one whisper, where
   Moved with low motions of slow air
   The great trees nigh the castle swing
   In the sad coloured evening;
   â_Ricorditi di me_, _che son_
   _La Pia_ââthat small sweet word alone
   Is not yet gone.

   â_Ricorditi di me_ââthe sound
      Sole out of deep dumb days remote
   Across the fiery and fatal ground
      Comes tender as a hurt birdâs note
   To where, a ghost with empty hands,
   A woe-worn ghost, her palace stands
   In the mid city, where the strong
   Bells turn the sunset air to song,
   And the towers throng.

   With other face, with speech the same,
   A mightier maidenâs likeness came
   Late among mourning men that slept,
   A sacred ghost that went and wept,
   White as the passion-wounded Lamb,
   Saying, âAh, remember me, that am
   Italia.â  (From deep sea to sea
   Earth heard, earth knew her, that this was she.)
   â_Ricorditi_.

   âLove made me of all things fairest thing,
      And Hate unmade me; this knows he
   Who with Godâs sacerdotal ring
      Enringed mine hand, espousing me.â
   Yea, in thy myriad-mooded woe,
   Yea, Mother, hast thou not said so?
   Have not our hearts within us stirred,
   O thou most holiest, at thy word?
   Have we not heard?

   As this dead tragic land that she
   Found deadly, such was time to thee;
   Years passed thee withering in the red
   Maremma, years that deemed thee dead,
   Ages that sorrowed or that scorned;
   And all this while though all they mourned
   Thou sawest the end of things unclean,
   And the unborn that should see thee a queen.
   Have we not seen?

   The weary poet, thy sad son,
      Upon thy soil, under thy skies,
   Saw all Italian things save oneâ
      Italia; this thing missed his eyes;
   The old mother-might, the breast, the face,
   That reared, that lit the Roman race;
   This not Leopardi saw; but we,
   What is it, Mother, that we see,
   What if not thee?

   Look thou from Siena southward home,
   Where the priestâs pall hangs rent on Rome,
   And through the red rent swaddling-bands
   Towards thine she strains her labouring hands.
   Look thou and listen, and let be
   All the dead quick, all the bond free;
   In the blind eyes let there be sight;
   In the eighteen centuries of the night
   Let there be light.

   Bow down the beauty of thine head,
      Sweet, and with lips of living breath
   Kiss thy sons sleeping and thy dead,
      That there be no more sleep or death.
   Give us thy light, thy might, thy love,
   Whom thy face seen afar above
   Drew to thy feet; and when, being free,
   Thou hast blest thy children born to thee,
   Bless also me.

   Me that when others played or slept
   Sat still under thy cross and wept;
   Me who so early and unaware
   Felt fall on bent bared brows and hair
   (Thin drops of the overflowing flood!)
   The bitter blessing of thy blood;
   The sacred shadow of thy pain,
   Thine, the true maiden-mother, slain
   And raised again.

   Me consecrated, if I might,
      To praise thee, or to love at least,
   O mother of all menâs dear delight,
      Thou madest a choral-souled boy-priest,
   Before my lips had leave to sing,
   Or my hands hardly strength to cling
   About the intolerable tree
   Whereto they had nailed my heart and thee
   And said, âLet be.â

   For to thee too the high Fates gave
   Grace to be sacrificed and save,
   That being arisen, in the equal sun,
   God and the People should be one;
   By those red roads thy footprints trod,
   Man more divine, more human God,
   Saviour; that where no light was known
   But darkness, and a daytime flown,
   Light should be shown.

   Let there be light, O Italy!
      For our feet falter in the night.
   O lamp of living years to be,
      O light of God, let there be light!
   Fill with a love keener than flame
   Men sealed in spirit with thy name,
   The cities and the Roman skies,
   Where men with other than manâs eyes
   Saw thy sun rise.

   For theirs thou wast and thine were they
   Whose names outshine thy very day;
   For they are thine and theirs thou art
   Whose blood beats living in manâs heart,
   Remembering ages fled and dead
   Wherein for thy sake these men bled;
   They that saw Trebia, they that see
   Mentana, they in years to be
   That shall see thee.

   For thine are all of us, and ours
      Thou; till the seasons bring to birth
   A perfect people, and all the powers
      Be with them that bear fruit on earth;
   Till the inner heart of man be one
   With freedom, and the sovereign sun;
   And Time, in likeness of a guide,
   Lead the Republic as a bride
   Up to Godâs side.




COR CORDIUM


   O HEART of hearts, the chalice of loveâs fire,
      Hid round with flowers and all the bounty of bloom;
      O wonderful and perfect heart, for whom
   The lyrist liberty made life a lyre;
   O heavenly heart, at whose most dear desire
      Dead love, living and singing, cleft his tomb,
      And with him risen and regent in deathâs room
   All day thy choral pulses rang full choir;
   O heart whose beating blood was running song,
      O sole thing sweeter than thine own songs were,
         Help us for thy free loveâs sake to be free,
   True for thy truthâs sake, for thy strengthâs sake strong,
      Till very liberty make clean and fair
         The nursing earth as the sepulchral sea.




IN SAN LORENZO


   IS thine hour come to wake, O slumbering Night?
      Hath not the Dawn a message in thine ear?
      Though thou be stone and sleep, yet shalt thou hear
   When the word falls from heavenâLet there be light.
   Thou knowest we would not do thee the despite
      To wake thee while the old sorrow and shame were near;
      We spake not loud for thy sake, and for fear
   Lest thou shouldst lose the rest that was thy right,
   The blessing given thee that was thine alone,
   The happiness to sleep and to be stone:
      Nay, we kept silence of thee for thy sake
   Albeit we knew thee alive, and left with thee
   The great good gift to feel not nor to see;
      But will not yet thine Angel bid thee wake?




TIRESIAS


PART I


   IT is an hour before the hour of dawn.
      Set in mine hand my staff and leave me here
      Outside the hollow house that blind men fear,
   More blind than I who live on life withdrawn
      And feel on eyes that see not but foresee
      The shadow of death which clothes Antigone.

   Here lay her living body that here lies
      Dead, if man living know what thing is death,
      If life be all made up of blood and breath,
   And no sense be save as of ears and eyes.
      But heart there is not, tongue there is not found,
      To think or sing what verge hath life or bound.

   In the beginning when the powers that made
      The young child man a little loved him, seeing
      His joy of life and fair face of his being,
   And bland and laughing with the man-child played,
      As friends they saw on our divine one day
      King Cadmus take to queen Harmonia.

   The strength of soul that builds up as with hands
      Walls spiritual and towers and towns of thought
      Which only fate, not force, can bring to nought,
   Took then to wife the light of all menâs lands,
      Warâs child and loveâs, most sweet and wise and strong,
      Order of things and rule and guiding song.

   It was long since: yea, even the sun that saw
      Remembers hardly what was, nor how long.
      And now the wise heart of the worldly song
   Is perished, and the holy hand of law
      Can set no tune on time, nor help again
      The power of thought to build up life for men.

   Yea, surely are they now transformed or dead,
      And sleep below this world, where no sun warms,
      Or move about it now in formless forms
   Incognizable, and all their lordship fled;
      And where they stood up singing crawl and hiss,
      With fangs that kill behind their lips that kiss.

   Yet though her marriage-garment, seeming fair,
      Was dyed in sin and woven of jealousy
      To turn their seed to poison, time shall see
   The gods reissue from them, and repair
      Their broken stamp of godhead, and again
      Thought and wise love sing words of law to men.

   I, Tiresias the prophet, seeing in Thebes
      Much evil, and the misery of menâs hands
      Who sow with fruitless wheat the stones and sands,
   With fruitful thorns the fallows and warm glebes,
      Bade their hands hold lest worse hap came to pass;
      But which of you had heed of Tiresias?

   I am as Timeâs self in mine own wearied mind,
      Whom the strong heavy-footed years have led
      From night to night and dead men unto dead,
   And from the blind hope to the memory blind;
      For each manâs life is woven, as Timeâs life is,
      Of blind young hopes and old blind memories.

   I am a soul outside of death and birth.
      I see before me and afterward I see,
      O child, O corpse, the live dead face of thee,
   Whose life and death are one thing upon earth
      Where day kills night and night again kills day
      And dies; but where is that Harmonia?

   O all-beholden light not seen of me,
      Air, and warm winds that under the sunâs eye
      Stretch your strong wings at morning; and thou, sky,
   Whose hollow circle engirdling earth and sea
      All night the set stars limit, and all day
      The moving sun remeasures; ye, I say,

   Ye heights of hills, and thou Dircean spring
      Inviolable, and ye towers that saw cast down
      Seven kings keen-sighted toward your seven-faced town
   And quenched the red seed of one sightless king;
      And thou, for death less dreadful than for birth,
      Whose wild leaves hide the horror of the earth,

   O mountain whereon gods made chase of kings,
      CithÃ¦ron, thou that sawest on Pentheus dead
      Fangs of a mother fasten and wax red
   And satiate with a son thy swollen springs,
      And heardst her cry fright all thine eyriesâ nests
      Who gave death suck at sanguine-suckling breasts;

   Yea, and a grief more grievous, without name,
      A curse too grievous for the name of grief,
      Thou sawest, and heardst the rumour scare belief
   Even unto death and madness, when the flame
      Was lit whose ashes dropped about the pyre
      That of two brethren made one sundering fire;

   O bitter nurse, that on thine hard bare knees
      Rearâdst for his fate the bloody-footed child
      Whose hands should be more bloodily defiled
   And the old blind feet walk wearier ways than these,
      Whose seed, brought forth in darkness unto doom,
      Should break as fire out of his motherâs womb;

   I bear you witness as ye bear to me,
      Time, day, night, sun, stars, life, death, air, sea, earth,
      And ye that round the human house of birth
   Watch with veiled heads and weaponed hands, and see
      Good things and evil, strengthless yet and dumb,
      Sit in the clouds with cloudlike hours to come;

   Ye forces without form and viewless powers
      That have the keys of all our years in hold,
      That prophesy too late with tongues of gold,
   In a strange speech whose words are perished hours,
      I witness to you what good things ye give
      As ye to me what evil while I live.

   What should I do to blame you, what to praise,
      For floral hours and hours funereal?
      What should I do to curse or bless at all
   For winter-woven or summer-coloured days?
      Curse he that will and bless you whoso can,
      I have no common part in you with man.

   I hear a springing water, whose quick sound
      Makes softer the soft sunless patient air,
      And the windâs hand is laid on my thin hair
   Light as a loverâs, and the grasses round
      Have odours in them of green bloom and rain
      Sweet as the kiss wherewith sleep kisses pain.

   I hear the low sound of the spring of time
      Still beating as the low live throb of blood,
      And where its waters gather head and flood
   I hear change moving on them, and the chime
      Across them of reverberate wings of hours
      Sounding, and feel the future air of flowers.

   The wind of change is soft as snow, and sweet
      The sense thereof as roses in the sun,
      The faint wind springing with the springs that run,
   The dim sweet smell of flowering hopes, and heat
      Of unbeholden sunrise; yet how long
      I know not, till the morning put forth song.

   I prophesy of life, who live with death;
      Of joy, being sad; of sunlight, who am blind;
      Of man, whose ways are alien from mankind
   And his lips are not parted with manâs breath;
      I am a word out of the speechless years,
      The tongue of time, that no man sleeps who hears.

   I stand a shadow across the door of doom,
      Athwart the lintel of deathâs house, and wait;
      Nor quick nor dead, nor flexible by fate,
   Nor quite of earth nor wholly of the tomb;
      A voice, a vision, light as fire or air,
      Driven between days that shall be and that were.

   I prophesy, with feet upon a grave,
      Of death cast out and life devouring death
      As flame doth wood and stubble with a breath;
   Of freedom, though all manhood were one slave;
      Of truth, though all the world were liar; of love,
      That time nor hate can raze the witness of.

   Life that was given for loveâs sake and his lawâs
      Their powers have no more power on; they divide
      Spoils wrung from lust or wrath of man or pride,
   And keen oblivion without pity or pause
      Sets them on fire and scatters them on air
      Like ashes shaken from a suppliantâs hair.

   But life they lay no hand on; life once given
      No force of theirs hath competence to take;
      Life that was given for some divine thingâs sake,
   To mix the bitterness of earth with heaven,
      Light with manâs night, and music with his breath,
      Dies not, but makes its living food of death.

   I have seen this, who live where men are not,
      In the high starless air of fruitful night
      On that serenest and obscurest height
   Where dead and unborn things are one in thought
      And whence the live unconquerable springs
      Feed full of force the torrents of new things.

   I have seen this, who saw long since, being man,
      As now I know not if indeed I be,
      The fair bare body of Wisdom, good to see
   And evil, whence my light and night began;
      Light on the goal and darkness on the way,
      Light all through night and darkness all through day.

   Mother, that by that Pegasean spring
      Didst fold round in thine arms thy blinded son,
      Weeping âO holiest, what thing hast thou done,
   What, to my child? woeâs me that see the thing!
      Is this thy love to me-ward, and hereof
      Must I take sample how the gods can love?

   âO child, thou hast seen indeed, poor child of mine,
      The breasts and flanks of Pallas bare in sight,
      But never shalt see more the dear sunâs light;
   O Helicon, how great a pay is thine
      For some poor antelopes and wild-deer dead,
      My childâs eyes hast thou taken in their steadââ

   Mother, thou knewest not what she had to give,
      Thy goddess, though then angered, for mine eyes;
      Fame and foreknowledge, and to be most wise,
   And centuries of high-thoughted life to live,
      And in mine hand this guiding staff to be
      As eyesight to the feet of men that see.

   Perchance I shall not die at all, nor pass
      The general door and lintel of men dead;
      Yet even the very tongue of wisdom said
   What grace should come with death to Tiresias,
      What special honour that Godâs hand accord
      Who gathers all menâs nations as their lord.

   And sometimes when the secret eye of thought
      Is changed with obscuration, and the sense
      Aches with long pain of hollow prescience,
   And fiery foresight with foresuffering bought
      Seems even to infect my spirit and consume,
      Hunger and thirst come on me for the tomb.

   I could be fain to drink my death and sleep,
      And no more wrapped about with bitter dreams
      Talk with the stars and with the winds and streams
   And with the inevitable years, and weep;
      For how should he who communes with the years
      Be sometime not a living spring of tears?

   O child, that guided of thine only will
      Didst set thy maiden foot against the gate
      To strike it open ere thine hour of fate,
   Antigone, men say not thou didst ill,
      For loveâs sake and the reverence of his awe
      Divinely dying, slain by mortal law;

   For love is awful as immortal death.
      And through thee surely hath thy brother won
      Rest, out of sight of our world-weary sun,
   And in the dead land where ye ghosts draw breath
      A royal place and honour; so wast thou
      Happy, though earth have hold of thee too now.

   So hast thou life and name inviolable
      And joy it may be, sacred and severe,
      Joy secret-souled beyond all hope or fear,
   A monumental joy wherein to dwell
      Secluse and silent, a selected state,
      Serene possession of thy proper fate.

   Thou art not dead as these are dead who live
      Full of blind years, a sorrow-shaken kind,
      Nor as these are am I the prophet blind;
   They have not life that have not heart to give
      Life, nor have eyesight who lack heart to see
      When to be not is better than to be.

   O ye whom time but bears with for a span,
      How long will ye be blind and dead, how long
      Make your own souls part of your own soulâs wrong?
   Son of the word of the most high gods, man,
      Why wilt thou make thine hour of light and breath
      Emptier of all but shame than very death?

   Fool, wilt thou live for ever? though thou care
      With all thine heart for life to keep it fast,
      Shall not thine hand forego it at the last?
   Lo, thy sure hour shall take thee by the hair
      Sleeping, or when thou knowest not, or wouldst fly;
      And as men died much mightier shalt thou die.

   Yea, they are dead, men much more worth than thou;
      The savour of heroic lives that were,
      Is it not mixed into thy common air?
   The sense of them is shed about thee now:
      Feel not thy brows a wind blowing from far?
      Aches not thy forehead with a future star?

   The light that thou mayâst make out of thy name
      Is in the wind of this same hour that drives,
      Blown within reach but once of all menâs lives;
   And he that puts forth hand upon the flame
      Shall have it for a garland on his head
      To sign him for a king among the dead.

   But these men that the lessening years behold,
      Who sit the most part without flame or crown,
      And brawl and sleep and wear their life-days down
   With joys and griefs ignobler than of old,
      And care not if the better day shall beâ
      Are these or art thou dead, Antigone?

   PART II

   As when one wakes out of a waning dream
      And sees with instant eyes the naked thought
      Whereof the vision as a web was wrought,
   I saw beneath a heaven of cloud and gleam,
      Ere yet the heart of the young sun waxed brave,
      One like a prophet standing by a grave.

   In the hoar heaven was hardly beam or breath,
      And all the coloured hills and fields were grey,
      And the wind wandered seeking for the day,
   And wailed as though he had found her done to death
      And this grey hour had built to bury her
      The hollow twilight for a sepulchre.

   But in my soul I saw as in a glass
      A pale and living body full of grace
      There lying, and over it the prophetâs face
   Fixed; and the face was not of Tiresias,
      For such a starry fire was in his eyes
      As though their light it was that made the skies.

   Such eyes should Godâs have been when very love
      Looked forth of them and set the sun aflame,
      And such his lips that called the light by name
   And bade the morning forth at sound thereof;
      His face was sad and masterful as fate,
      And like a starâs his look compassionate.

   Like a starâs gazed on of sad eyes so long
      It seems to yearn with pity, and all its fire
      As a manâs heart to tremble with desire
   And heave as though the light would bring forth song;
      Yet from his face flashed lightning on the land,
      And like the thunder-bearerâs was his hand.

   The steepness of strange stairs had tired his feet,
      And his lips yet seemed sick of that salt bread
      Wherewith the lips of banishment are fed;
   But nothing was there in the world so sweet
      As the most bitter love, like Godâs own grace,
      Wherewith he gazed on that fair buried face.

   Grief and glad pride and passion and sharp shame,
      Wrath and remembrance, faith and hope and hate
      And pitiless pity of days degenerate,
   Were in his eyes as an incorporate flame
      That burned about her, and the heart thereof
      And central flower was very fire of love.

   But all about her grave wherein she slept
      Were noises of the wild wind-footed years
      Whose footprints flying were full of blood and tears,
   Shrieks as of MÃ¦nads on their hills that leapt
      And yelled as beasts of ravin, and their meat
      Was the rent flesh of their own sons to eat:

   And fiery shadows passing with strange cries,
      And Sphinx-like shapes about the ruined lands,
      And the red reek of parricidal hands
   And intermixture of incestuous eyes,
      And light as of that self-divided flame
      Which made an end of the Cadmean name.

   And I beheld again, and lo the grave,
      And the bright body laid therein as dead,
      And the same shadow across another head
   That bowed down silent on that sleeping slave
      Who was the lady of empire from her birth
      And light of all the kingdoms of the earth.

   Within the compass of the watcherâs hand
      All strengths of other men and divers powers
      Were held at ease and gathered up as flowers;
   His heart was as the heart of his whole land,
      And at his feet as natural servants lay
      Twilight and dawn and night and labouring day.

   He was most awful of the sons of God.
      Even now men seeing seemed at his lips to see
      The trumpet of the judgment that should be,
   And in his right hand terror for a rod,
      And in the breath that made the mountains bow
      The horned fire of Moses on his brow.

   The strong wind of the coming of the Lord
      Had blown as flame upon him, and brought down
      On his bare head from heaven fire for a crown,
   And fire was girt upon him as a sword
      To smite and lighten, and on what ways he trod
      There fell from him the shadow of a God.

   Pale, with the whole worldâs judgment in his eyes,
      He stood and saw the grief and shame endure
      That he, though highest of angels might not cure,
   And the same sins done under the same skies,
      And the same slaves to the same tyrants thrown,
      And fain he would have slept, and fain been stone.

   But with unslumbering eyes he watched the sleep
      That sealed her sense whose eyes were suns of old;
      And the night shut and opened, and behold,
   The same grave where those prophets came to weep,
      But she that lay therein had moved and stirred,
      And where those twain had watched her stood a third.

   The tripled rhyme that closed in Paradise
      With Loveâs name sealing up its starry speechâ
      The tripled might of hand that found in reach
   All crowns beheld far off of all menâs eyes,
      Song, colour, carven wonders of live stoneâ
      These were not, but the very soul alone.

   The living spirit, the good gift of grace,
      The faith which takes of its own blood to give
      That the dead veins of buried hope may live,
   Came on her sleeping, face to naked face,
      And from a soul more sweet than all the south
      Breathed love upon her sealed and breathless mouth.

   Between her lips the breath was blown as fire,
      And through her flushed veins leapt the liquid life,
      And with sore passion and ambiguous strife
   The new birth rent her and the new desire,
      The will to live, the competence to be,
      The sense to hearken and the soul to see.

   And the third prophet standing by her grave
      Stretched forth his hand and touched her, and her eyes
      Opened as sudden suns in heaven might rise,
   And her soul caught from his the faith to save;
      Faith above creeds, faith beyond records, born
      Of the pure, naked, fruitful, awful morn.

   For in the daybreak now that night was dead
      The light, the shadow, the delight, the pain,
      The purpose and the passion of those twain,
   Seemed gathered on that third prophetic head,
      And all their crowns were as one crown, and one
      His face with her face in the living sun.

   For even with that communion of their eyes
      His whole soul passed into her and made her strong;
      And all the sounds and shows of shame and wrong,
   The hand that slays, the lip that mocks and lies,
      Temples and thrones that yet men seem to seeâ
      Are these dead or art thou dead, Italy?




THE SONG OF THE STANDARD


   MAIDEN most beautiful, mother most bountiful, lady of lands,
   Queen and republican, crowned of the centuries whose years are thy
   sands,
   See for thy sake what we bring to thee, Italy, here in our hands.

   This is the banner thy gonfalon, fair in the front of thy fight,
   Red from the hearts that were pierced for thee, white as thy mountains
   are white,
   Green as the spring of thy soul everlasting, whose life-blood is
   light.

   Take to thy bosom thy banner, a fair bird fit for the nest,
   Feathered for flight into sunrise or sunset, for eastward or west,
   Fledged for the flight everlasting, but held yet warm to thy breast.

   Gather it close to thee, song-bird or storm-bearer, eagle or dove,
   Lift it to sunward, a beacon beneath to the beacon above,
   Green as our hope in it, white as our faith in it, red as our love.

   Thunder and splendour of lightning are hid in the folds of it furled;
   Who shall unroll it but thou, as thy bolt to be handled and hurled,
   Out of whose lips is the honey, whose bosom the milk of the world?

   Out of thine hands hast thou fed us with pasture of colour and song;
   Glory and beauty by birthright to thee as thy garments belong;
   Out of thine hands thou shalt give us as surely deliverance from
   wrong.

   Out of thine eyes thou hast shed on us love as a lamp in our night,
   Wisdom a lodestar to ships, and remembrance a flame-coloured light;
   Out of thine eyes thou shalt shew us as surely the sun-dawn of right.

   Turn to us, speak to us, Italy, mother, but once and a word,
   None shall not follow thee, none shall not serve thee, not one that
   has heard;
   Twice hast thou spoken a message, and time is athirst for the third.

   Kingdom and empire of peoples thou hadst, and thy lordship made one
   North sea and south sea and east men and west men that look on the
   sun;
   Spirit was in thee and counsel, when soul in the nations was none.

   Banner and beacon thou wast to the centuries of storm-wind and foam,
   Ages that clashed in the dark with each other, and years without home;
   Empress and prophetess wast thou, and what wilt thou now be, O Rome?

   Ah, by the faith and the hope and the love that have need of thee now,
   Shines not thy face with the forethought of freedom, and burns not thy
   brow?
   Who is against her but all men? and who is beside her but thou?

   Art thou not better than all men? and where shall she turn but to
   thee?
   Lo, not a breath, not a beam, not a beacon from midland to sea;
   Freedom cries out for a sign among nations, and none will be free.

   England in doubt of her, France in despair of her, all without heartâ
   Stand on her side in the vanward of ages, and strike on her part!
   Strike but one stroke for the love of her love of thee, sweet that
   thou art!

   Take in thy right hand thy banner, a strong staff fit for thine hand;
   Forth at the light of it lifted shall foul things flock from the land;
   Faster than stars from the sun shall they fly, being lighter than
   sand.

   Green thing to green in the summer makes answer, and rose-tree to
   rose;
   Lily by lily the year becomes perfect; and none of us knows
   What thing is fairest of all things on earth as it brightens and
   blows.

   This thing is fairest in all time of all things, in all time is bestâ
   Freedom, that made thee, our mother, and suckled her sons at thy
   breast;
   Take to thy bosom the nations, and there shall the world come to rest.




ON THE DOWNS


   A FAINT sea without wind or sun;
   A sky like flameless vapour dun;
      A valley like an unsealed grave
   That no man cares to weep upon,
      Bare, without boon to crave,
         Or flower to save.

   And on the lipâs edge of the down,
   Here where the bent-grass burns to brown
      In the dry sea-wind, and the heath
   Crawls to the cliff-side and looks down,
      I watch, and hear beneath
         The low tide breathe.

   Along the long lines of the cliff,
   Down the flat sea-line without skiff
      Or sail or back-blown fume for mark,
   Through wind-worn heads of heath and stiff
      Stems blossomless and stark
         With dry sprays dark,

   I send mine eyes out as for news
   Of comfort that all these refuse,
      Tidings of light or living air
   From windward where the low clouds muse
      And the sea blind and bare
         Seems full of care.

   So is it now as it was then,
   And as men have been such are men.
      There as I stood I seem to stand,
   Here sitting chambered, and again
      Feel spread on either hand
         Sky, sea, and land.

   As a queen taken and stripped and bound
   Sat earth, discoloured and discrowned;
      As a kingâs palace empty and dead
   The sky was, without light or sound;
      And on the summerâs head
         Were ashes shed.

   Scarce wind enough was on the sea,
   Scarce hope enough there moved in me,
      To sow with live blown flowers of white
   The green plainâs sad serenity,
      Or with stray thoughts of light
         Touch my soulâs sight.

   By footless ways and sterile went
   My thought unsatisfied, and bent
      With blank unspeculative eyes
   On the untracked sands of discontent
      Where, watched of helpless skies,
         Life hopeless lies.

   East and west went my soul to find
   Light, and the world was bare and blind
      And the soil herbless where she trod
   And saw men laughing scourge mankind,
      Unsmitten by the rod
         Of any God.

   Out of timeâs blind old eyes were shed
   Tears that were mortal, and left dead
      The heart and spirit of the years,
   And on mans fallen and helmless head
      Timeâs disanointing tears
         Fell cold as fears.

   Hope flowering had but strength to bear
   The fruitless fruitage of despair;
      Grief trod the grapes of joy for wine,
   Whereof love drinking unaware
      Died as one undivine
         And made no sign.

   And soul and body dwelt apart;
   And weary wisdom without heart
      Stared on the dead round heaven and sighed,
   âIs death too hollow as thou art,
      Or as manâs living pride?â
         And saying so died.

   And my soul heard the songs and groans
   That are about and under thrones,
      And felt through all timeâs murmur thrill
   Fateâs old imperious semitones
      That made of good and ill
         One same tune still.

   Then âWhere is God? and where is aid?
   Or what good end of these?â she said;
      âIs there no God or end at all,
   Nor reason with unreason weighed,
      Nor force to disenthral
         Weak feet that fall?

   âNo light to lighten and no rod
   To chasten men?  Is there no God?â
      So girt with anguish, iron-zoned,
   Went my soul weeping as she trod
      Between the men enthroned
         And men that groaned.

   O fool, that for brute cries of wrong
   Heard not the grey glad motherâs song
      Ring response from the hills and waves,
   But heard harsh noises all day long
      Of spirits that were slaves
         And dwelt in graves.

   The wise word of the secret earth
   Who knows what life and death are worth,
      And how no help and no control
   Can speed or stay things come to birth,
      Nor all worldsâ wheels that roll
         Crush one born soul.

   With all her tongues of life and death,
   With all her bloom and blood and breath,
      From all years dead and all things done,
   In the ear of man the mother saith,
      âThere is no God, O son,
         If thou be none.â

   So my soul sick with watching heard
   That day the wonder of that word,
      And as one springs out of a dream
   Sprang, and the stagnant wells were stirred
      Whence flows through gloom and gleam
         Thoughtâs soundless stream.

   Out of pale cliff and sunburnt health,
   Out of the low sea curled beneath
      In the landâs bending arm embayed,
   Out of all lives that thought hears breathe
      Life within life inlaid,
         Was answer made.

   A multitudinous monotone
   Of dust and flower and seed and stone,
      In the deep sea-rockâs mid-sea sloth,
   In the live waterâs trembling zone,
      In all men love and loathe,
         One God at growth.

   One forceful nature uncreate
   That feeds itself with death and fate,
      Evil and good, and change and time,
   That within all men lies at wait
      Till the hour shall bid them climb
         And live sublime.

   For all things come by fate to flower
   At their unconquerable hour,
      And time brings truth, and truth makes free,
   And freedom fills timeâs veins with power,
      As, brooding on that sea,
         My thought filled me.

   And the sun smote the clouds and slew,
   And from the sun the seaâs breath blew,
      And white waves laughed and turned and fled
   The long green heaving sea-field through,
      And on them overhead
         The sky burnt red

   Like a furled flag that wind sets free,
   On the swift summer-coloured sea
      Shook out the red lines of the light,
   The live sunâs standard, blown to lee
      Across the live seaâs white
         And green delight.

   And with divine triumphant awe
   My spirit moved within me saw,
      With burning passion of stretched eyes,
   Clear as the lightâs own firstborn law,
      In windless wastes of skies
         Timeâs deep dawn rise.




MESSIDOR


   PUT in the sickles and reap;
      For the morning of harvest is red,
         And the long large ranks of the corn
         Coloured and clothed as the morn
   Stand thick in the fields and deep
      For them that faint to be fed.
   Let all that hunger and weep
      Come hither, and who would have bread
   Put in the sickles and reap.

   Coloured and clothed as the morn,
      The grain grows ruddier than gold,
         And the good strong sun is alight
         In the mists of the day-dawn white,
   And the crescent, a faint sharp horn,
      In the fear of his face turns cold
   As the snakes of the night-time that creep
      From the flag of our faith unrolled.
   Put in the sickles and reap.

   In the mists of the day-dawn white
      That roll round the morning star,
         The large flame lightens and grows
         Till the red-gold harvest-rows,
   Full-grown, are full of the light
      As the spirits of strong men are,
   Crying, Who shall slumber or sleep?
      Who put back morning or mar?
   Put in the sickles and reap.

   Till the red-gold harvest-rows
      For miles through shudder and shine
         In the windâs breath, fed with the sun,
         A thousand spear-heads as one
   Bowed as for battle to close
      Line in rank against line
   With place and station to keep
      Till all menâs hands at a sign
   Put in the sickles and reap.

   A thousand spear-heads as one
      Wave as with swing of the sea
         When the mid tide sways at its height;
         For the hour is for harvest or fight
   In face of the just calm sun,
      As the signal in season may be
   And the lot in the helm may leap
      When chance shall shake it; but ye,
   Put in the sickles and reap.

   For the hour is for harvest or fight
      To clothe with raiment of red;
         O men sore stricken of hours,
         Lo, this one, is not it ours
   To glean, to gather, to smite?
      Let none make risk of his head
   Within reach of the clean scythe-sweep,
      When the people that lay as the dead
   Put in the sickles and reap.

   Lo, this one, is not it ours,
      Now the ruins of dead things rattle
         As dead menâs bones in the pit,
         Now the kings wax lean as they sit
   Girt round with memories of powers,
      With musters counted as cattle
   And armies folded as sheep
      Till the red blind husbandman battle
   Put in the sickles and reap?

   Now the kings wax lean as they sit,
      The people grow strong to stand;
         The men they trod on and spat,
         The dumb dread people that sat
   As corpses cast in a pit,
      Rise up with God at their hand,
   And thrones are hurled on a heap,
      And strong men, sons of the land,
   Put in the sickles and reap.

   The dumb dread people that sat
      All night without screen for the night,
         All day without food for the day,
         They shall give not their harvest away,
   They shall eat of its fruit and wax fat:
      They shall see the desire of their sight,
   Though the ways of the seasons be steep,
      They shall climb with face to the light,
   Put in the sickles and reap.




ODE ON THE INSURRECTION IN CANDIA


STR. 1


               I LAID my laurel-leaf
               At the white feet of grief,
      Seeing how with covered face and plumeless wings,
               With unreverted head
               Veiled, as who mourns his dead,
      Lay Freedom couched between the thrones of kings,
         A wearied lion without lair,
   And bleeding from base wounds, and vexed with alien air.



STR. 2


   Who was it, who, put poison to thy mouth,
      Who lulled with craft or chant thy vigilant eyes,
   O light of all men, lamp to north and south,
      Eastward and westward, under all menâs skies?
   For if thou sleep, we perish, and thy name
      Dies with the dying of our ephemeral breath;
   And if the dust of death oâergrows thy flame,
      Heaven also is darkened with the dust of death.
   If thou be mortal, if thou change or cease,
   If thine hand fail, or thine eyes turn from Greece,
   Thy firstborn, and the firstfruits of thy fame,
   God is no God, and man is moulded out of shame.



STR. 3


   Is there change in the secret skies,
      In the sacred places that see
         The divine beginning of things,
            The weft of the web of the world?
   Is Freedom a worm that dies,
      And God no God of the free?
         Is heaven like as earth with her kings
            And time as a serpent curled
               Round life as a tree?

   From the steel-bound snows of the north,
      From the mystic mother, the east,
         From the sands of the fiery south,
            From the low-lit clouds of the west,
   A sound of a cry is gone forth;
      Arise, stand up from the feast,
         Let wine be far from the mouth,
            Let no man sleep or take rest,
               Till the plague hath ceased.

   Let none rejoice or make mirth
      Till the evil thing be stayed,
         Nor grief be lulled in the lute,
            Nor hope be loud on the lyre;
   Let none be glad upon earth.
      O music of young man and maid,
         O songs of the bride, be mute.
            For the light of her eyes, her desire,
               Is the soul dismayed.

   It is not a land new-born
      That is scourged of a strangerâs hand,
         That is rent and consumed with flame.
            We have known it of old, this face,
   With the cheeks and the tresses torn,
      With shame on the brow as a brand.
         We have named it of old by name,
            The land of the royallest race,
               The most holy land.



STR. 4


         Had I words of fire,
            Whose words are weak as snow;
         Were my heart a lyre
            Whence all its love might flow
   In the mighty modulations of desire,
   In the notes wherewith manâs passion worships woe;

         Could my song release
            The thought weak words confine,
         And my grief, O Greece,
            Prove how it worships thine;
   It would move with pulse of war the limbs of peace,
   Till she flushed and trembled and became divine.

         (Once she held for true
            This truth of sacred strain;
         Though blood drip like dew
            And life run down like rain,
   It is better that war spare but one or two
   Than that many live, and liberty be slain.)

         Then with fierce increase
            And bitter motherâs mirth,
         From the womb of peace,
            A womb that yearns for birth,
   As a man-child should deliverance come to Greece,
   As a saviour should the child be born on earth.



STR. 5


   O that these my days had been
   Ere white peace and shame were wed
   Without torch or dancersâ din
   Round the unsacred marriage-bed!
   For of old the sweet-tongued law,
   Freedom, clothed with all menâs love,
   Girt about with all menâs awe,
   With the wild war-eagle mated
   The white breast of peace the dove,
   And his ravenous heart abated
   And his windy wings were furled
   In an eyrie consecrated
   Where the snakes of strife uncurled,
   And her soul was soothed and sated
   With the welfare of the world.



ANT.  1


      But now, close-clad with peace,
      While war lays hand on Greece,
   The kingdoms and their kings stand by to see;
      âAha, we are strong,â they say,
      âWe are sure, we are well,â even they;
   âAnd if we serve, what ails ye to be free?
      We are warm, clothed round with peace and shame;
   But ye lie dead and naked, dying for a name.â



ANT. 2


   O kings and queens and nations miserable,
      O fools and blind, and full of sins and fears,
   With these it is, with you it is not well;
      Ye have one hour, but these the immortal years.
   These for a pang, a breath, a pulse of pain,
      Have honour, while that honour on earth shall be:
   Ye for a little sleep and sloth shall gain
      Scorn, while one man of all men born is free.
   Even as the depth more deep than night or day,
   The sovereign heaven that keeps its eldest way,
   So without chance or change, so without stain,
   The heaven of their high memories shall nor wax nor wane.



ANT. 3


   As the soul on the lips of the dead
      Stands poising her wings for flight,
         A bird scarce quit of her prison,
            But fair without form or flesh,
   So stands over each manâs head
      A splendour of imminent light,
         A glory of fame rearisen,
            Of day rearisen afresh
            From the hells of night.

   In the hundred cities of Crete
      Such glory was not of old,
         Though her name was great upon earth
            And her face was fair on the sea.
   The words of her lips were sweet,
      Her days were woven with gold,
         Her fruits came timely to birth;
            So fair she was, being free,
               Who is bought and sold.

   So fair, who is fairer now
      With her children dead at her side,
         Unsceptred, unconsecrated,
            Unapparelled, unhelped, unpitied,
   With blood for gold on her brow,
      Where the towery tresses divide;
         The goodly, the golden-gated,
            Many-crowned, many-named, many-citied,
               Made like as a bride.

   And these are the bridegroomâs gifts;
      Anguish that straitens the breath,
         Shame, and the weeping of mothers,
            And the suckling dead at the breast,
   White breast that a long sob lifts;
      And the dumb dead mouth, which saith,
         âHow long, and how long, my brothers?â
            And wrath which endures not rest,
            And the pains of death.



ANT. 4


         Ah, but would that men,
            With eyelids purged by tears,
         Saw, and heard again
            With consecrated ears,
   All the clamour, all the splendour, all the slain,
   All the lights and sounds of war, the fates and fears;

         Saw far off aspire,
            With crash of mine and gate,
         From a single pyre
            The myriad flames of fate,
   Soul by soul transfigured in funereal fire,
   Hate made weak by love, and love made strong by hate.

         Children without speech,
            And many a nursing breast;
         Old men in the breach,
            Where death sat down a guest;
   With triumphant lamentation made for each,
   Let the world salute their ruin and their rest.

         In one iron hour
            The crescent flared and waned,
         As from tower to tower,
            Fire-scathed and sanguine-stained,
   Death, with flame in hand, an open bloodred flower,
   Passed, and where it bloomed no bloom of life remained.



ANT. 5


   Hear, thou earth, the heavy-hearted
   Weary nurse of waning races;
   From the dust of years departed,
   From obscure funereal places,
   Raise again thy sacred head,
   Lift the light up of thine eyes
   Where are they of all thy dead
   That did more than these men dying
   In their godlike Grecian wise?
   Not with garments rent and sighing,
   Neither gifts of myrrh and gold,
   Shall their sons lament them lying,
   Lest the fame of them wax cold;
   But with lives to lives replying,
   And a worship from of old.



EPODE


   O sombre heart of earth and swoln with grief,
      That in thy time wast as a bird for mirth,
   Dim womb of life and many a seed and sheaf,
      And full of changes, ancient heart of earth,
   From grain and flower, from grass and every leaf,
      Thy mysteries and thy multitudes of birth,
   From hollow and hill, from vales and all thy springs,
      From all shapes born and breath of all lips made,
   From thunders, and the sound of winds and wings,
      From light, and from the solemn sleep of shade,
   From the full fountains of all living things,
      Speak, that this plague be stayed.
   Bear witness all the ways of death and life
   If thou be with us in the worldâs old strife,
         If thou be mother indeed,
         And from these wounds that bleed
   Gather in thy great breast the dews that fall,
         And on thy sacred knees
         Lull with mute melodies,
   Mother, thy sleeping sons in deathâs dim hall.
         For these thy sons, behold,
         Sons of thy sons of old,
   Bear witness if these be not as they were;
         If that high name of Greece
         Depart, dissolve, decease
   From mouths of men and memories like as air.
         By the last milk that drips
         Dead on the childâs dead lips,
   By old menâs white unviolated hair,
         By sweet unburied faces
         That fill those red high places
   Where death and freedom found one lionâs lair,
         By all the bloodred tears
         That fill the chaliced years,
   The vessels of the sacrament of time,
         Wherewith, O thou most holy,
         O Freedom, sure and slowly
   Thy ministrant white hands cleanse earth of crime;
         Though we stand off afar
         Where slaves and slaveries are,
   Among the chains and crowns of poisonous peace;
         Though not the beams that shone
         From rent Arcadion
   Can melt her mists and bid her snows decrease;
         Do thou with sudden wings
         Darken the face of kings,
   But turn again the beauty of thy brows on Greece;
         Thy white and woundless brows,
         Whereto her great heart bows;
   Give her the glories of thine eyes to see;
         Turn thee, O holiest head,
         Toward all thy quick and dead,
   For loveâs sake of the souls that cry for thee;
         O love, O light, O flame,
         By thine own Grecian name,
   We call thee and we charge thee that all these be free.

_Jan._ 1867.




âNON DOLETâ


   IT does not hurt.  She looked along the knife
      Smiling, and watched the thick drops mix and run
      Down the sheer blade; not that which had been done
   Could hurt the sweet sense of the Roman wife,
   But that which was to do yet ere the strife
      Could end for each for ever, and the sun:
      Nor was the palm yet nor was peace yet won
   While pain had power upon her husbandâs life.

   It does not hurt, Italia.  Thou art more
      Than bride to bridegroom; how shalt thou not take
      The gift loveâs blood has reddened for thy sake?
   Was not thy lifeblood given for us before?
      And if loveâs heartblood can avail thy need,
      And thou not die, how should it hurt indeed?




EURYDICE


                              TO VICTOR HUGO

   ORPHEUS, the night is full of tears and cries,
      And hardly for the storm and ruin shed
      Can even thine eyes be certain of her head
   Who never passed out of thy spiritâs eyes,
   But stood and shone before them in such wise
      As when with love her lips and hands were fed,
      And with mute mouth out of the dusty dead
   Strove to make answer when thou badâst her rise.

   Yet viper-stricken must her lifeblood feel
      The fang that stung her sleeping, the foul germ
      Even when she wakes of hellâs most poisonous worm,
   Though now it writhe beneath her wounded heel.
      Turn yet, she will not fade nor fly from thee;
      Wait, and see hell yield up Eurydice.




AN APPEAL


I


   ART thou indeed among these,
   Thou of the tyrannous crew,
   The kingdoms fed upon blood,
   O queen from of old of the seas,
   England, art thou of them too
   That drink of the poisonous flood,
   That hide under poisonous trees?



II


   Nay, thy name from of old,
   Mother, was pure, or we dreamed
   Purer we held thee than this,
   Purer fain would we hold;
   So goodly a glory it seemed,
   A fame so bounteous of bliss,
   So more precious than gold.



III


   A praise so sweet in our ears,
   That thou in the tempest of things
   As a rock for a refuge shouldst stand,
   In the bloodred river of tears
   Poured forth for the triumph of kings;
   A safeguard, a sheltering land,
   In the thunder and torrent of years.



IV


   Strangers came gladly to thee,
   Exiles, chosen of men,
   Safe for thy sake in thy shade,
   Sat down at thy feet and were free.
   So men spake of thee then;
   Now shall their speaking be stayed?
   Ah, so let it not be!



V


   Not for revenge or affright,
   Pride, or a tyrannous lust,
   Cast from thee the crown of thy praise.
   Mercy was thine in thy might;
   Strong when thou wert, thou wert just;
   Now, in the wrong-doing days,
   Cleave thou, thou at least, to the right.



VI


   How should one charge thee, how sway,
   Save by the memories that were?
   Not thy gold nor the strength of thy ships,
   Nor the might of thine armies at bay,
   Made thee, mother, most fair;
   But a word from republican lips
   Said in thy name in thy day.



VII


   Hast thou said it, and hast thou forgot?
   Is thy praise in thine ears as a scoff?
   Blood of men guiltless was shed,
   Children, and souls without spot,
   Shed, but in places far off;
   _Let slaughter no more be_, said
   Milton; and slaughter was not.



VIII


   Was it not said of thee too,
   Now, but now, by thy foes,
   By the slaves that had slain their France,
   And thee would slay as they slewâ
   âDown with her walls that enclose
   Freemen that eye us askance,
   Fugitives, men that are true!â



IX


   This was thy praise or thy blame
   From bondsman or freemanâto be
   Pure from pollution of slaves,
   Clean of their sins, and thy name
   Bloodless, innocent, free;
   Now if thou be not, thy waves
   Wash not from off thee thy shame.



X


   Freeman he is not, but slave,
   Whoso in fear for the State
   Cries for surety of blood,
   Help of gibbet and grave;
   Neither is any land great
   Whom, in her fear-stricken mood,
   These things only can save.



XI


   Lo, how fair from afar,
   Taintless of tyranny, stands
   Thy mighty daughter, for years
   Who trod the winepress of war;
   Shines with immaculate hands;
   Slays not a foe, neither fears;
   Stains not peace with a scar.



XII


   Be not as tyrant or slave,
   England; be not as these,
   Thou that wert other than they.
   Stretch out thine hand, but to save;
   Put forth thy strength, and release;
   Lest there arise, if thou slay,
   Thy shame as a ghost from the grave.

_November_ 20, 1867.




PERINDE AC CADAVER


   IN a vision Liberty stood
      By the childless charm-stricken bed
   Where, barren of glory and good,
   Knowing nought if she would not or would,
      England slept with her dead.

   Her face that the foam had whitened,
      Her hands that were strong to strive,
   Her eyes whence battle had lightened,
   Over all was a drawn shroud tightened
      To bind her asleep and alive.

   She turned and laughed in her dream
      With grey lips arid and cold;
   She saw not the face as a beam
   Burn on her, but only a gleam
      Through her sleep as of new-stamped gold.

   But the goddess, with terrible tears
      In the light of her down-drawn eyes,
   Spake fire in the dull sealed ears;
   âThou, sick with slumbers and fears,
      Wilt thou sleep now indeed or arise?

   âWith dreams and with words and with light
      Memories and empty desires
   Thou hast wrapped thyself round all night;
   Thou hast shut up thine heart from the right,
      And warmed thee at burnt-out fires.

   âYet once if I smote at thy gate,
      Thy sons would sleep not, but heard;
   O thou that wast found so great,
   Art thou smitten with folly or fate
      That thy sons have forgotten my word?

   âO Cromwellâs mother, O breast
      That suckled Milton! thy name
   That was beautiful then, that was blest,
   Is it wholly discrowned and deprest,
      Trodden under by sloth into shame?

   âWhy wilt thou hate me and die?
      For none can hate me and live.
   What ill have I done to thee? why
   Wilt thou turn from me fighting, and fly,
      Who would follow thy feet and forgive?

   âThou hast seen me stricken, and said,
      What is it to me?  I am strong:
   Thou hast seen me bowed down on my dead
   And laughed and lifted thine head,
      And washed thine hands of my wrong.

   âThou hast put out the soul of thy sight;
      Thou hast sought to my foemen as friend,
   To my traitors that kiss me and smite,
   To the kingdoms and empires of night
      That begin with the darkness, and end.

   âTurn thee, awaken, arise,
      With the light that is risen on the lands,
   With the change of the fresh-coloured skies;
   Set thine eyes on mine eyes,
      Lay thy hands in my hands.â

   She moved and mourned as she heard,
      Sighed and shifted her place,
   As the wells of her slumber were stirred
   By the music and wind of the word,
      Then turned and covered her face.

   âAh,â she said in her sleep,
      âIs my work not done with and done?
   Is there corn for my sickle to reap?
   And strange is the pathway, and steep,
      And sharp overhead is the sun.

   âI have done thee service enough,
      Loved thee enough in my day;
   Now nor hatred nor love
   Nor hardly remembrance thereof
      Lives in me to lighten my way.

   âAnd is it not well with us here?
      Is change as good as is rest?
   What hope should move me, or fear,
   That eye should open or ear,
      Who have long since won what is best?

   âWhere among us are such things
      As turn menâs hearts into hell?
   Have we not queens without stings,
   Scotched princes, and fangless kings?
      Yea,â she said, âwe are well.

   âWe have filed the teeth of the snake
      Monarchy, how should it bite?
   Should the slippery slow thing wake,
   It will not sting for my sake;
      Yea,â she said, âI do right.â

   So spake she, drunken with dreams,
      Mad; but again in her ears
   A voice as of storm-swelled streams
   Spake; âNo brave shame then redeems
      Thy lusts of sloth and thy fears?

   âThy poor lie slain of thine hands,
      Their starved limbs rot in thy sight;
   As a shadow the ghost of thee stands
   Among men living and lands,
      And stirs not leftward or right.

   âFreeman he is not, but slave,
      Who stands not out on my side;
   His own hand hollows his grave,
   Nor strength is in me to save
      Where strength is none to abide.

   âTime shall tread on his name
      That was written for honour of old,
   Who hath taken in change for fame
   Dust, and silver, and shame,
      Ashes, and iron, and gold.â




MONOTONES


   BECAUSE there is but one truth;
      Because there is but one banner;
         Because there is but one light;
   Because we have with us our youth
      Once, and one chance and one manner
         Of service, and then the night;

   Because we have found not yet
      Any way for the world to follow
         Save only that ancient way;
   Whosoever forsake or forget,
      Whose faith soever be hollow,
         Whose hope soever grow grey;

   Because of the watchwords of kings
      That are many and strange and unwritten,
         Diverse, and our watchword is one;
   Therefore, though seven be the strings,
      One string, if the harp be smitten,
         Sole sounds, till the tune be done;

   Sounds without cadence or change
      In a weary monotonous burden,
         Be the keynote of mourning or mirth;
   Free, but free not to range;
      Taking for crown and for guerdon
         No manâs praise upon earth;

   Saying one sole word evermore,
      In the ears of the charmed world saying,
         Charmed by spells to its death;
   One that chanted of yore
      To a tune of the sword-sweepâs playing
         In the lips of the dead blew breath;

   Therefore I set not mine hand
      To the shifting of changed modulations,
         To the smiting of manifold strings;
   While the thrones of the throned men stand,
      One song for the morning of nations,
         One for the twilight of kings.

   One chord, one word, and one way,
      One hope as our law, one heaven,
         Till slain be the great one wrong;
   Till the people it could not slay,
      Risen up, have for one star seven,
         For a single, a sevenfold song.




THE OBLATION


   ASK nothing more of me, sweet;
      All I can give you I give.
         Heart of my heart, were it more,
   More would be laid at your feet:
      Love that should help you to live,
         Song that should spur you to soar.

   All things were nothing to give
      Once to have sense of you more,
         Touch you and taste of you sweet,
   Think you and breathe you and live,
      Swept of your wings as they soar,
         Trodden by chance of your feet.

   I that have love and no more
      Give you but love of you, sweet:
         He that hath more, let him give;
   He that hath wings, let him soar;
      Mine is the heart at your feet
         Here, that must love you to live.




A YEARâS BURDEN


                                   1870

   FIRE and wild light of hope and doubt and fear,
   Wind of swift change, and clouds and hours that veer
   As the storm shifts of the tempestuous year;
      Cry wellaway, but well befall the right.

   Hope sits yet hiding her war-wearied eyes,
   Doubt sets her forehead earthward and denies,
   But fear brought hand to hand with danger dies,
      Dies and is burnt up in the fire of fight.

   Hearts bruised with loss and eaten through with shame
   Turn at the timeâs touch to devouring flame;
   Grief stands as one that knows not her own name,
      Nor if the star she sees bring day or night.

   No song breaks with it on the violent air,
   But shrieks of shame, defeat, and brute despair;
   Yet something at the starâs heart far up there
      Burns as a beacon in our shipwrecked sight.

   O strange fierce light of presage, unknown star,
   Whose tongue shall tell us what thy secrets are,
   What message trembles in thee from so far?
      Cry wellaway, but well befall the right.

   From shores laid waste across an iron sea
   Where the waifs drift of hopes that were to be,
   Across the red rolled foam we look for thee,
      Across the fire we look up for the light.

   From days laid waste across disastrous years,
   From hopes cut down across a world of fears,
   We gaze with eyes too passionate for tears,
      Where faith abides though hope be put to flight.

   Old hope is dead, the grey-haired hope grown blind
   That talked with us of old things out of mind,
   Dreams, deeds and men the world has left behind;
      Yet, though hope die, faith lives in hopeâs despite.

   Ay, with hearts fixed on death and hopeless hands
   We stand about our banner while it stands
   Above but one field of the ruined lands;
      Cry wellaway, but well befall the right.

   Though France were given for prey to bird and beast,
   Though Rome were rent in twain of king and priest,
   The soul of man, the soul is safe at least
      That gives death life and dead men hands to smite.

   Are ye so strong, O kings, O strong men?  Nay,
   Waste all ye will and gather all ye may,
   Yet one thing is there that ye shall not slay,
      Even thought, that fire nor iron can affright.

   The woundless and invisible thought that goes
   Free throughout time as north or south wind blows,
   Far throughout space as east or west sea flows,
      And all dark things before it are made bright.

   Thy thought, thy word, O soul republican,
   O spirit of life, O God whose name is man:
   What sea of sorrows but thy sight shall span?
      Cry wellaway, but well befall the right.

   With all its coils crushed, all its rings uncurled,
   The one most poisonous worm that soiled the world
   Is wrenched from off the throat of man, and hurled
      Into deep hell from empireâs helpless height.

   Time takes no more infection of it now;
   Like a dead snake divided of the plough,
   The rotten thing lies cut in twain; but thou,
      Thy fires shall heal us of the serpentâs bite.

   Ay, with red cautery and a burning brand
   Purge thou the leprous leaven of the land;
   Take to thee fire, and iron in thine hand,
      Till blood and tears have washed the soiled limbs white.

   We have sinned against thee in dreams and wicked sleep;
   Smite, we will shrink not; strike, we will not weep;
   Let the heart feel thee; let thy wound go deep;
      Cry wellaway, but well befall the right.

   Wound us with love, pierce us with longing, make
   Our souls thy sacrifices; turn and take
   Our hearts for our sin-offerings lest they break,
      And mould them with thine hands and give them might.

   Then, when the cup of ills is drained indeed,
   Will we come to thee with our wounds that bleed,
   With famished mouths and hearts that thou shalt feed,
      And see thee worshipped as the worldâs delight.

   There shall be no more wars nor kingdoms won,
   But in thy sight whose eyes are as the sun
   All names shall be one name, all nations one,
      All souls of men in manâs one soul unite.

   O sea whereon men labour, O great sea
   That heaven seems one with, shall these things not be?
   O earth, our earth, shall time not make us free?
      Cry wellaway, but well befall the right.




EPILOGUE


   BETWEEN the wave-ridge and the strand
   I let you forth in sight of land,
      Songs that with storm-crossed wings and eyes
      Strain eastward till the darkness dies;
   Let signs and beacons fall or stand,
      And stars and balefires set and rise;
   Ye, till some lordlier lyric hand
      Weave the beloved brows their crown,
      At the beloved feet lie down.

   O, whatsoever of life or light
   Love hath to give you, what of might
      Or heart or hope is yours to live,
      I charge you take in trust to give
   For very loveâs sake, in whose sight,
      Through poise of hours alternative
   And seasons plumed with light or night,
      Ye live and move and have your breath
      To sing with on the ridge of death.

   I charge you faint not all night through
   For loveâs sake that was breathed on you
      To be to you as wings and feet
      For travel, and as blood to heat
   And sense of spirit to renew
      And bloom of fragrance to keep sweet
   And fire of purpose to keep true
      The life, if life in such things be,
      That I would give you forth of me.

   Out where the breath of war may bear,
   Out in the rank moist reddened air
      That sounds and smells of death, and hath
      No light but deathâs upon its path
   Seen through the black windâs tangled hair,
      I send you past the wild timeâs wrath
   To find his face who bade you bear
      Fruit of his seed to faith and love,
      That he may take the heart thereof.

   By day or night, by sea or street,
   Fly till ye find and clasp his feet
      And kiss as worshippers who bring
      Too much love on their lips to sing,
   But with hushed heads accept and greet
      The presence of some heavenlier thing
   In the near air; so may ye meet
      His eyes, and droop not utterly
      For shameâs sake at the light you see.

   Not utterly struck spiritless
   For shameâs sake and unworthiness
      Of these poor forceless hands that come
      Empty, these lips that should be dumb,
   This love whose seal can but impress
      These weak word-offerings wearisome
   Whose blessings have not strength to bless
      Nor lightnings fire to burn up aught
      Nor smite with thunders of their thought.

   One thought they have, even love; one light,
   Truth, that keeps clear the sun by night;
      One chord, of faith as of a lyre;
      One heat, of hope as of a fire;
   One heart, one music, and one might,
      One flame, one altar, and one choir;
   And one manâs living head in sight
      Who said, when all timeâs sea was foam,
      âLet there be Romeââand there was Rome.

   As a star set in space for token
   Like a live word of Godâs mouth spoken,
      Visible sound, light audible,
      In the great darkness thick as hell
   A stanchless flame of love unsloken,
      A sign to conquer and compel,
   A law to stand in heaven unbroken
      Whereby the sun shines, and wherethrough
      Timeâs eldest empires are made new;

   So rose up on our generations
   That light of the most ancient nations,
      Law, life, and light, on the worldâs way,
      The very God of very day,
   The sun-god; from their star-like stations
      Far down the night in disarray
   Fled, crowned with fires of tribulations,
      The suns of sunless years, whose light
      And life and law were of the night.

   The naked kingdoms quenched and stark
   Drave with their dead things down the dark,
      Helmless; their whole world, throne by throne,
      Fell, and its whole heart turned to stone,
   Hopeless; their hands that touched our ark
      Withered; and lo, aloft, alone,
   On timeâs white waters manâs one bark,
      Where the red sundawnâs open eye
      Lit the soft gulf of low green sky.

   So for a season piloted
   It sailed the sunlight, and struck red
      With fire of dawn reverberate
      The wan face of incumbent fate
   That paused half pitying overhead
      And almost had foregone the freight
   Of those dark hours the next day bred
      For shame, and almost had forsworn
      Service of night for love of morn.

   Then broke the whole night in one blow,
   Thundering; then all hell with one throe
      Heaved, and brought forth beneath the stroke
      Death; and all dead things moved and woke
   That the dawnâs arrows had brought low,
      At the great sound of night that broke
   Thundering, and all the old world-wide woe;
      And under nightâs loud-sounding dome
      Men sought her, and she was not Rome.

   Still with blind hands and robes blood-wet
   Night hangs on heaven, reluctant yet,
      With black blood dripping from her eyes
      On the soiled lintels of the skies,
   With brows and lips that thirst and threat,
      Heart-sick with fear lest the sun rise,
   And aching with her fires that set,
      And shuddering ere dawn bursts her bars,
      Burns out with all her beaten stars.

   In this black wind of war they fly
   Now, ere that hour be in the sky
      That brings back hope, and memory back,
      And light and law to lands that lack;
   That spiritual sweet hour whereby
      The bloody-handed night and black
   Shall be cast out of heaven to die;
      Kingdom by kingdom, crown by crown,
      The fires of darkness are blown down.

   Yet heavy, grievous yet the weight
   Sits on us of imperfect fate.
      From wounds of other days and deeds
      Still this dayâs breathing body bleeds;
   Still kings for fear and slaves for hate
      Sow lives of men on earth like seeds
   In the red soil they saturate;
      And we, with faces eastward set,
      Stand sightless of the morning yet.

   And many for pure sorrowâs sake
   Look back and stretch back hands to take
      Gifts of nightâs giving, ease and sleep,
      Flowers of nightâs grafting, strong to steep
   The soul in dreams it will not break,
      Songs of soft hours that sigh and sweep
   Its lifted eyelids nigh to wake
      With subtle plumes and lulling breath
      That soothe its weariness to death.

   And many, called of hope and pride,
   Fall ere the sunrise from our side.
      Fresh lights and rumours of fresh fames
      That shift and veer by night like flames,
   Shouts and blown trumpets, ghosts that glide
      Calling, and hail them by dead names,
   Fears, angers, memories, dreams divide
      Spirit from spirit, and wear out
      Strong hearts of men with hope and doubt.

   Till time beget and sorrow bear
   The soul-sick eyeless child despair,
      That comes among us, mad and blind,
      With counsels of a broken mind,
   Tales of times dead and woes that were,
      And, prophesying against mankind,
   Shakes out the horror of her hair
      To take the sunlight with its coils
      And hold the living soul in toils.

   By many ways of death and moods
   Souls pass into their servitudes.
      Their young wings weaken, plume by plume
      Drops, and their eyelids gather gloom
   And close against manâs frauds and feuds,
      And their tongues call they know not whom
   To help in their vicissitudes;
      For many slaveries are, but one
      Liberty, single as the sun.

   One light, one law, that burns up strife,
   And one sufficiency of life.
      Self-stablished, the sufficing soul
      Hears the loud wheels of changes roll,
   Sees against man man bare the knife,
      Sees the world severed, and is whole;
   Sees force take dowerless fraud to wife,
      And fear from fraudâs incestuous bed
      Crawl forth and smite his father dead:

   Sees death made drunk with war, sees time
   Weave many-coloured crime with crime,
      State overthrown on ruining state,
      And dares not be disconsolate.
   Only the soul hath feet to climb,
      Only the soul hath room to wait,
   Hath brows and eyes to hold sublime
      Above all evil and all good,
      All strength and all decrepitude.

   She only, she since earth began,
   The many-minded soul of man,
      From one incognizable root
      That bears such divers-coloured fruit,
   Hath ruled for blessing or for ban
      The flight of seasons and pursuit;
   She regent, she republican,
      With wide and equal eyes and wings
      Broods on things born and dying things.

   Even now for love or doubt of us
   The hour intense and hazardous
      Hangs high with pinions vibrating
      Whereto the light and darkness cling,
   Dividing the dim season thus,
      And shakes from one ambiguous wing
   Shadow, and one is luminous,
      And day falls from it; so the past
      Torments the future to the last.

   And we that cannot hear or see
   The sounds and lights of liberty,
      The witness of the naked God
      That treads on burning hours unshod
   With instant feet unwounded; we
      That can trace only where he trod
   By fire in heaven or storm at sea,
      Not know the very present whole
      And naked nature of the soul;

   We that see wars and woes and kings,
   And portents of enormous things,
      Empires, and agonies, and slaves,
      And whole flame of town-swallowing graves;
   That hear the harsh hours clap sharp wings
      Above the roar of ranks like waves,
   From wreck to wreck as the world swings;
      Know but that men there are who see
      And hear things other far than we.

   By the light sitting on their brows,
   The fire wherewith their presence glows,
      The music falling with their feet,
      The sweet sense of a spirit sweet
   That with their speech or motion grows
      And breathes and burns menâs hearts with heat;
   By these signs there is none but knows
      Men who have life and grace to give,
      Men who have seen the soul and live.

   By the strength sleeping in their eyes,
   The lips whereon their sorrow lies
      Smiling, the lines of tears unshed,
      The large divine look of one dead
   That speaks out of the breathless skies
      In silence, when the light is shed
   Upon manâs soul of memories;
      The supreme look that sets love free,
      The look of stars and of the sea;

   By the strong patient godhead seen
   Implicit in their mortal mien,
      The conscience of a God held still
      And thunders ruled by their own will
   And fast-bound fires that might burn clean
      This worldly air that foul things fill,
   And the afterglow of what has been,
      That, passing, shows us without word
      What they have seen, what they have heard,

   By all these keen and burning signs
   The spirit knows them and divines.
      In bonds, in banishment, in grief,
      Scoffed at and scourged with unbelief,
   Foiled with false trusts and thwart designs,
      Stripped of green days and hopes in leaf,
   Their mere bare body of glory shines
      Higher, and man gazing surelier sees
      What light, what comfort is of these.

   So I now gazing; till the sense
   Being set on fire of confidence
      Strains itself sunward, feels out far
      Beyond the bright and morning star,
   Beyond the extreme waveâs refluence,
      To where the fierce first sunbeams are
   Whose fire intolerant and intense
      As birthpangs whence day burns to be
      Parts breathless heaven from breathing sea.

   I see not, know not, and am blest,
   Master, who know that thou knowest,
      Dear lord and leader, at whose hand
      The first days and the last days stand,
   With scars and crowns on head and breast,
      That fought for love of the sweet land
   Or shall fight in her latter quest;
      All the days armed and girt and crowned
      Whose glories ring thy glory round.

   Thou sawest, when all the world was blind,
   The light that should be of mankind,
      The very day that was to be;
      And how shalt thou not sometime see
   Thy city perfect to thy mind
      Stand face to living face with thee,
   And no miscrowned manâs head behind;
      The hearth of man, the human home,
      The central flame that shall be Rome?

   As one that ere a June day rise
   Makes seaward for the dawn, and tries
      The water with delighted limbs
      That taste the sweet dark sea, and swims
   Right eastward under strengthening skies,
      And sees the gradual rippling rims
   Of waves whence day breaks blossom-wise
      Take fire ere light peer well above,
      And laughs from all his heart with love;

   And softlier swimming with raised head
   Feels the full flower of morning shed
      And fluent sunrise round him rolled
      That laps and laves his body bold
   With fluctuant heaven in waterâs stead,
      And urgent through the growing gold
   Strikes, and sees all the spray flash red,
      And his soul takes the sun, and yearns
      For joy wherewith the seaâs heart burns;

   So the soul seeking through the dark
   Heavenward, a dove without an ark,
      Transcends the unnavigable sea
      Of years that wear out memory;
   So calls, a sunward-singing lark,
      In the ear of souls that should be free;
   So points them toward the sun for mark
      Who steer not for the stress of waves,
      And seek strange helmsmen, and are slaves.

   For if the swimmerâs eastward eye
   Must see no sunriseâmust put by
      The hope that lifted him and led
      Once, to have light about his head,
   To see beneath the clear low sky
      The green foam-whitened wave wax red
   And all the morningâs banner flyâ
      Then, as earthâs helpless hopes go down,
      Let earthâs self in the dark tides drown.

   Yea, if no morning must behold
   Man, other than were they now cold,
      And other deeds than past deeds done,
      Nor any near or far-off sun
   Salute him risen and sunlike-souled,
      Free, boundless, fearless, perfect, one,
   Let manâs world die like worlds of old,
      And here in heavenâs sight only be
      The sole sun on the worldless sea.




NOTES


P. 7


    _That called on Cotys by her name_.

                                                   Ãsch.  Fr. 54 (á¼¨Î´ÏÎ½Î¿á½¶).



P. 94


    _Was it Love brake forth flower-fashion_, _a bird with gold on his
    wings_?

                                                              Ar. Av. 696.



P. 161


                      _That saw Saint Catherine bodily_.

Her pilgrimage to Avignon to recall the Pope into Italy as its redeemer
from the distractions of the time is of course the central act of St.
Catherineâs life, the great abiding sign of the greatness of spirit and
genius of heroism which distinguished this daughter of the people, and
should yet keep her name fresh above the holy horde of saints, in other
records than the calendar; but there is no less significance in the story
which tells how she succeeded in humanizing a criminal under sentence of
death, and given over by the priests as a soul doomed and desperate; how
the man thus raised and melted out of his fierce and brutal despair
besought her to sustain him to the last by her presence; how, having
accompanied him with comfort and support to the very scaffold, and seen
his head fall, she took it up, and turning to the spectators who stood
doubtful whether the poor wretch could be âsaved,â kissed it in sign of
her faith that his sins were forgiven him.  The high and fixed passion of
her heroic temperament gives her a right to remembrance and honour of
which the miracle-mongers have done their best to deprive her.  Cleared
of all the refuse rubbish of thaumaturgy, her life would deserve a
chronicler who should do justice at once to the ardour of her religious
imagination and to a thing far rarer and more preciousâthe strength and
breadth of patriotic thought and devotion which sent this girl across the
Alps to seek the living symbol of Italian hope and unity, and bring it
back by force of simple appeal in the name of God and of the country.  By
the light of those solid and actual qualities which ensure to her no
ignoble place on the noble roll of Italian women who have deserved well
of Italy, the record of her visions and ecstasies may be read without
contemptuous intolerance of hysterical disease.  The rapturous visionary
and passionate ascetic was in plain matters of this earth as pure and
practical a heroine as Joan of Arc.



P. 164


                     _There on the dim side-chapel wall_.

In the church of San Domenico.



P. 165


                  _But blood nor tears ye love not_, _you_.

In the Sienese Academy the two things notable to me were the detached
wall-painting by Sodoma of the tortures of Christ bound to the pillar,
and the divine though mutilated group of the Graces in the centre of the
main hall.  The glory and beauty of ancient sculpture refresh and satisfy
beyond expression a sense wholly wearied and well-nigh nauseated with
contemplation of endless sanctities and agonies attempted by mediÃ¦val
art, while yet as handless as accident or barbarism has left the
sculptured goddesses.



P. 168


                      _Saw all Italian things save one_.

   O patria mia, vedo le mura e gli archi,
   E le colonne e i simulacri e lâerme
   Torri degli avi nostri;
   Ma la gloria non vedo,
   Non vedo il lauro a il ferro ondâ eran carchi
   I nostri padri antichi.

                                                                 LEOPARDI.



P. 179


                  _Mother_, _that by that Pegasean spring_.

                                               Call.  Lav.  Pall. 105â112.



P. 229


    _With black blood dripping from her eyes_.

    Îºá½°Î¾ á½¸Î¼Î¼á½±ÏÏÎ½ ÏÏá½±ÏÎ¿ÏÏÎ¹Î½ Î±á¼·Î¼Î± Î´ÏÏÏÎ¹Î»á½³Ï.

                                                        Ãsch.  Cho.  1058.




***END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SONGS BEFORE SUNRISE***


******* This file should be named 4072-0.txt or 4072-0.zip *******


This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
http://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/4/0/7/4072


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you receive
specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of this
eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given
away--you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks
not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country outside the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you'll have to check the laws of the country where you
  are located before using this ebook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and The
Project Gutenberg Trademark LLC, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is in Fairbanks, Alaska, with the
mailing address: PO Box 750175, Fairbanks, AK 99775, but its
volunteers and employees are scattered throughout numerous
locations. Its business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt
Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to
date contact information can be found at the Foundation's web site and
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:

    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.



﻿Project Gutenberg's Songs Of Two Nations, by Algernon Charles Swinburne

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Songs Of Two Nations

Author: Algernon Charles Swinburne

Release Date: May 14, 2013 [EBook #8127]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SONGS OF TWO NATIONS ***




Produced by Mark Sherwood, Marc D'Hooghe and Delphine Lettau







SONGS OF TWO NATIONS

By Algernon Charles Swinburne




CONTENTS


A SONG OF ITALY

ODE ON THE PROCLAMATION OF THE FRENCH REPUBLIC




DIRAE


     I saw the double-featured statue stand
       Of Memnon or of Janus, half with night
     Veiled, and fast bound with iron; half with light
       Crowned, holding all men's future in his hand.

     And all the old westward face of time grown grey
       Was writ with cursing and inscribed for death;
     But on the face that met the mornings breath
       Fear died of hope as darkness dies of day.




A SONG OF ITALY


     Inscribed

     With All Devotion and Reverence

     To:

     JOSEPH MAZZINI

     1867


     Upon a windy night of stars that fell
       At the wind's spoken spell,
     Swept with sharp strokes of agonizing light
       From the clear gulf of night,
     Between the fixed and fallen glories one
       Against my vision shone,
     More fair and fearful and divine than they
       That measure night and day,
     And worthier worship; and within mine eyes
       The formless folded skies
     Took shape and were unfolded like as flowers.
       And I beheld the hours
     As maidens, and the days as labouring men,
       And the soft nights again
     As wearied women to their own souls wed,
       And ages as the dead.
     And over these living, and them that died,
       From one to the other side
     A lordlier light than comes of earth or air
       Made the world's future fair.
     A woman like to love in face, but not
       A thing of transient lot--
     And like to hope, but having hold on truth--
       And like to joy or youth,
     Save that upon the rock her feet were set--
       And like what men forget,
     Faith, innocence, high thought, laborious peace--
       And yet like none of these,
     Being not as these are mortal, but with eyes
       That sounded the deep skies
     And clove like wings or arrows their clear way
       Through night and dawn and day--
     So fair a presence over star and sun
       Stood, making these as one.
     For in the shadow of her shape were all
       Darkened and held in thrall,
     So mightier rose she past them; and I felt
       Whose form, whose likeness knelt
     With covered hair and face and clasped her knees;
       And knew the first of these
     Was Freedom, and the second Italy.
       And what sad words said she
     For mine own grief I knew not, nor had heart
       Therewith to bear my part
     And set my songs to sorrow; nor to hear
       How tear by sacred tear
     Fell from her eyes as flowers or notes that fall
       In some slain feaster's hall
     Where in mid music and melodious breath
       Men singing have seen death.
     So fair, so lost, so sweet she knelt; or so
       In our lost eyes below
     Seemed to us sorrowing; and her speech being said,
       Fell, as one who falls dead.
     And for a little she too wept, who stood
       Above the dust and blood
     And thrones and troubles of the world; then spake,
       As who bids dead men wake.
     "Because the years were heavy on thy head;
       Because dead things are dead;
     Because thy chosen on hill-side, city and plain
       Are shed as drops of rain;
     Because all earth was black, all heaven was blind,
       And we cast out of mind;
     Because men wept, saying _Freedom_, knowing of thee,
       Child, that thou wast not free;
     Because wherever blood was not shame was
       Where thy pure foot did pass;
     Because on Promethean rocks distent
       Thee fouler eagles rent;
     Because a serpent stains with slime and foam
       This that is not thy Rome;
     Child of my womb, whose limbs were made in me,
       Have I forgotten thee?
     In all thy dreams through all these years on wing,
       Hast thou dreamed such a thing?
     The mortal mother-bird outsoars her nest,
       The child outgrows the breast;
     But suns as stars shall fall from heaven and cease,
       Ere we twain be as these;
     Yea, utmost skies forget their utmost sun,
       Ere we twain be not one.
     My lesser jewels sewn on skirt and hem,
       I have no heed of them
     Obscured and flawed by sloth or craft or power;
       But thou, that wast my flower,
     The blossom bound between my brows and worn
       In sight of even and morn
     From the last ember of the flameless west
       To the dawn's baring breast--
     I were not Freedom if thou wert not free,
       Nor thou wert Italy.
     O mystic rose ingrained with blood, impearled
       With tears of all the world!
     The torpor of their blind brute-ridden trance
       Kills England and chills France;
     And Spain sobs hard through strangling blood; and snows
       Hide the huge eastern woes.
     But thou, twin-born with morning, nursed of noon,
       And blessed of star and moon!
     What shall avail to assail thee any more,
       From sacred shore to shore?
     Have Time and Love not knelt down at thy feet,
       Thy sore, thy soiled, thy sweet,
     Fresh from the flints and mire of murderous ways
       And dust of travelling days?
     Hath Time not kissed them, Love not washed them fair,
       And wiped with tears and hair?
     Though God forget thee, I will not forget;
       Though heaven and earth be set
     Against thee, O unconquerable child,
       Abused, abased, reviled,
     Lift thou not less from no funereal bed
       Thine undishonoured head;
     Love thou not less, by lips of thine once prest,
       This my now barren breast;
     Seek thou not less, being well assured thereof,
       O child, my latest love.
     For now the barren bosom shall bear fruit,
       Songs leap from lips long mute,
     And with my milk the mouths of nations fed
       Again be glad and red
     That were worn white with hunger and sorrow and thirst;
       And thou, most fair and first,
     Thou whose warm hands and sweet live lips I feel
       Upon me for a seal,
     Thou  whose  least looks, whose smiles and little sighs,
       Whose passionate pure eyes,
     Whose dear fair limbs that neither bonds could bruise
       Nor hate of men misuse,
     Whose flower-like breath and bosom, O my child,
       O mine and undefiled,
     Fill with such tears as burn like bitter wine
       These mother's eyes of mine,
     Thrill with huge passions and primeval pains
       The fullness of my veins,
     O sweetest head seen higher than any stands,
       I touch thee with mine hands,
     I lay my lips upon thee, O thou most sweet,
       To lift thee on thy feet
     And with the fire of mine to fill thine eyes;
       I say unto thee, Arise."

     §
     She ceased, and heaven was full of flame and sound,
       And earth's old limbs unbound
     Shone and waxed warm with fiery dew and seed
       Shed through her at this her need:
     And highest in heaven, a mother and full of grace,
       With no more covered face,
     With no more lifted hands and bended knees,
       Rose, as from sacred seas
     Love, when old time was full of plenteous springs,
       That fairest-born of things,
     The land that holds the rest in tender thrall
       For love's sake in them all,
     That binds with words and holds with eyes and hands
       All hearts in all men's lands.
     So died the dream whence rose the live desire
       That here takes form and fire,
     A spirit from the splendid grave of sleep
       Risen, that ye should not weep,
     Should not weep more nor ever, O ye that hear
       And ever have held her dear,
     Seeing now indeed she weeps not who wept sore,
       And sleeps not any more.
     Hearken ye towards her, O people, exalt your eyes;
       Is this a thing that dies?

     §
     Italia! by the passion of the pain
       That bent and rent thy chain;
     Italia! by the breaking of the bands,
       The shaking of the lands;
     Beloved, O men's mother, O men's queen,
       Arise, appear, be seen!
     Arise, array thyself in manifold
       Queen's raiment of wrought gold;
     With girdles of green freedom, and with red
       Roses, and white snow shed
     Above the flush and frondage of the hills
       That all thy deep dawn fills
     And all thy clear night veils and warms with wings
       Spread till the morning sings;
     The rose of resurrection, and the bright
       Breast lavish of the light,
     The lady lily like the snowy sky
       Ere the stars wholly die;
     As red as blood, and whiter than a wave,
       Flowers grown as from thy grave,
     From the green fruitful grass in Maytime hot,
       Thy grave, where thou art not.
     Gather the grass and weave, in sacred sign
       Of the ancient earth divine,
     The holy heart of things, the seed of birth,
       The mystical warm earth.
     O thou her flower of flowers, with treble braid
       Be thy sweet head arrayed,
     In witness of her mighty motherhood
       Who bore thee and found thee good,
     Her fairest-born of children, on whose head
       Her green and white and red
     Are hope and light and life, inviolate
       Of any latter fate.
     Fly, O our flag, through deep Italian air,
       Above the flags that were,
     The dusty shreds of shameful battle-flags
       Trampled and rent in rags,
     As withering woods in autumn's bitterest breath
       Yellow, and black as death;
     Black as crushed worms that sicken in the sense,
       And yellow as pestilence.
     Fly, green as summer and red as dawn and white
       As the live heart of light,
     The blind bright womb of colour unborn, that brings
       Forth all fair forms of things,
     As freedom all fair forms of nations dyed
       In divers-coloured pride.
     Fly fleet as wind on every wind that blows
       Between her seas and snows,
     From Alpine white, from Tuscan green, and where
       Vesuvius reddens air.
     Fly! and let all men see it, and all kings wail,
       And priests wax faint and pale,
     And the cold hordes that moan in misty places
       And the funereal races
     And the sick serfs of lands that wait and wane
       See thee and hate thee in vain.
     In the clear laughter of all winds and waves,
       In the blown grass of graves,
     In the long sound of fluctuant boughs of trees,
       In the broad breath of seas,
     Bid the sound of thy flying folds be heard;
       And as a spoken word
     Full of that fair god and that merciless
       Who rends the Pythoness,
     So be the sound and so the fire that saith
       She feels her ancient breath
     And the old blood move in her immortal veins.

     §
       Strange travail and strong pains,
     Our mother, hast thou borne these many years
       While thy pure blood and tears
     Mixed with the Tyrrhene and the Adrian sea;
       Light things were said of thee,
     As of one buried deep among the dead;
       Yea, she hath been, they said,
     She was when time was younger, and is not;
       The very cerecloths rot
     That flutter in the dusty wind of death,
       Not moving with her breath;
     Far seasons and forgotten years enfold
       Her dead corpse old and cold
     With many windy winters and pale springs:
       She is none of this world's things.
     Though her dead head like a live garland wear
       The golden-growing hair
     That flows over her breast down to her feet,
       Dead queens, whose life was sweet
     In sight of all men living, have been found
       So cold, so clad, so crowned,
     With all things faded and with one thing fair,
       Their old immortal hair,
     When flesh and bone turned dust at touch of day:
       And she is dead as they.
     So men said sadly, mocking; so the slave,
       Whose life was his soul's grave;
     So, pale or red with change of fast and feast,
       The sanguine-sandalled priest;
     So the Austrian, when his fortune came to flood,
       And the warm wave was blood;
     With wings that widened and with beak that smote,
       So shrieked through either throat
     From the hot horror of its northern nest
       That double-headed pest;
     So, triple-crowned with fear and fraud and shame,
       He of whom treason came,
     The herdsman of the Gadarean swine;
       So all his ravening kine,
     Made fat with poisonous pasture; so not we,
       Mother, beholding thee.
     Make answer, O the crown of all our slain,
       Ye that were one, being twain,
     Twain brethren, twin-born to the second birth,
       Chosen out of all our earth
     To be the prophesying stars that say
       How hard is night on day,
     Stars in serene and sudden heaven rerisen
       Before the sun break prison
     And ere the moon be wasted; fair first flowers
       In that red wreath of ours
     Woven with the lives of all whose lives were shed
       To crown their mother's head
     With leaves of civic cypress and thick yew,
       Till the olive bind it too,
     Olive and laurel and all loftier leaves
       That victory wears or weaves
     At her fair feet for her beloved brow;
       Hear, for she too hears now,
     O Pisacane, from Calabrian sands;
       O all heroic hands
     Close on the sword-hilt, hands of all her dead;
       O many a holy head,
     Bowed for her sake even to her reddening dust;
       O chosen, O pure and just,
     Who counted for a small thing life's estate,
       And died, and made it great;
     Ye whose names mix with all her memories; ye
       Who rather chose to see
     Death, than our more intolerable things;
       Thou whose name withers kings,
     Agesilao; thou too, O chiefliest thou,
       The slayer of splendid brow,
     Laid where the lying lips of fear deride
       The foiled tyrannicide,
     Foiled, fallen, slain, scorned, and happy; being in fame,
       Felice, like thy name,
     Not like thy fortune; father of the fight,
       Having in hand our light.
     Ah, happy! for that sudden-swerving hand
       Flung light on all thy land,
     Yea, lit blind France with compulsory ray,
       Driven down a righteous way;
     Ah, happiest! for from thee the wars began,
       From thee the fresh springs ran;
     From thee the lady land that queens the earth
       Gat as she gave new birth.
     O sweet mute mouths, O all fair dead of ours,
       Fair in her eyes as flowers,
     Fair without feature, vocal without voice,
       Strong without strength, rejoice!
     Hear it with ears that hear not, and on eyes
       That see not let it rise,
     Rise as a sundawn; be it as dew that drips
       On dumb and dusty lips;
     Eyes have ye not, and see it; neither ears,
       And there is none but hears.
     This is the same for whom ye bled and wept;
       She was not dead, but slept.
     This is that very Italy which was
       And is and shall not pass.

     §
     But thou, though all were not well done, O chief,
       Must thou take shame or grief?
     Because one man is not as thou or ten,
       Must thou take shame for men?
     Because the supreme sunrise is not yet,
       Is the young dew not wet?
     Wilt thou not yet abide a little while,
       Soul without fear or guile,
     Mazzini,--O our prophet, O our priest,
       A little while at least?
     A little hour of doubt and of control,
       Sustain thy sacred soul;
     Withhold thine heart, our father, but an hour;
       Is it not here, the flower,
     Is it not blown and fragrant from the root,
       And shall not be the fruit?
     Thy children, even thy people thou hast made,
       Thine, with thy words arrayed,
     Clothed with thy thoughts and girt with thy desires,
       Yearn up toward thee as fires.
     Art thou not father, O father, of all these?
       From thine own Genoese
     To where of nights the lower extreme lagune
       Feels its Venetian moon,
     Nor suckling's mouth nor mother's breast set free
       But hath that grace through thee.
     The milk of life on death's unnatural brink
       Thou gavest them to drink,
     The natural milk of freedom; and again
       They drank, and they were men.
     The wine and honey of freedom and of faith
       They drank, and cast off death.
     Bear with them now; thou art holier: yet endure,
       Till they as thou be pure.
     Their swords at least that stemmed half Austria's tide
       Bade all its bulk divide;
     Else, though fate bade them for a breath's space fall,
       She had not fallen at all.
     Not by their hands they made time's promise true;
       Not by their hands, but through.
     Nor on Custoza ran their blood to waste,
       Nor fell their fame defaced
     Whom stormiest Adria with tumultuous tides
       Whirls undersea and hides.
     Not his, who from the sudden-settling deck
       Looked over death and wreck
     To where the mother's bosom shone, who smiled
       As he, so dying, her child;
     For he smiled surely, dying, to mix his death
       With her memorial breath;
     Smiled, being most sure of her, that in no wise,
       Die whoso will, she dies:
     And she smiled surely, fair and far above,
       Wept not, but smiled for love.
     Thou too, O splendour of the sudden sword
       That drove the crews abhorred
     From Naples and the siren-footed strand,
       Flash from thy master's hand,
     Shine from the middle summer of the seas
       To the old Aeolides,
     Outshine their fiery fumes of burning night,
       Sword, with thy midday light;
     Flame as a beacon from the Tyrrhene foam
       To the rent heart of Rome,
     From the island of her lover and thy lord,
       Her saviour and her sword.
     In the fierce year of failure and of fame,
       Art thou not yet the same
     That wast as lightning swifter than all wings
       In the blind face of kings?
     When priests took counsel to devise despair,
       And princes to forswear,
     She clasped thee, O her sword and flag-bearer
       And staff and shield to her,
     O Garibaldi; need was hers and grief,
       Of thee and of the chief,
     And of another girt in arms to stand
       As good of hope and hand,
     As high of soul and happy, albeit indeed
       The heart should burn and bleed,
     So but the spirit shake not nor the breast
       Swerve, but abide its rest.
     As theirs did and as thine, though ruin clomb
       The highest wall of Rome,
     Though treason stained and spilt her lustral water,
       And slaves led slaves to slaughter,
     And priests, praying and slaying, watched them pass
       From a strange France, alas,
     That was not freedom; yet when these were past
       Thy sword and thou stood fast,
     Till new men seeing thee where Sicilian waves
       Hear now no sound of slaves,
     And where thy sacred blood is fragrant still
       Upon the Bitter Hill,
     Seeing by that blood one country saved and stained,
       Less loved thee crowned than chained,
     And less now only than the chief: for he,
       Father of Italy,
     Upbore in holy hands the babe new-born
       Through loss and sorrow and scorn,
     Of no man led, of many men reviled;
       Till lo, the new-born child
     Gone from between his hands, and in its place,
       Lo, the fair mother's face.
     Blessed is he of all men, being in one
       As father to her and son,
     Blessed of all men living, that he found
       Her weak limbs bared and bound,
     And in his arms and in his bosom bore,
       And as a garment wore
     Her weight of want, and as a royal dress
       Put on her weariness.
     As in faith's hoariest histories men read,
       The strong man bore at need
     Through roaring rapids when all heaven was wild
       The likeness of a child
     That still waxed greater and heavier as he trod,
       And altered, and was God.
     Praise him, O winds that move the molten air,
       O light of days that were,
     And light of days that shall be; land and sea,
       And heaven and Italy:
     Praise him, O storm and summer, shore and wave,
       O skies and every grave;
     O weeping hopes, O memories beyond tears,
       O many and murmuring years,
     O sounds far off in time and visions far,
       O sorrow with thy star,
     And joy with all thy beacons; ye that mourn,
       And ye whose light is born;
     O fallen faces, and O souls arisen,
       Praise him from tomb and prison,
     Praise him from heaven and sunlight; and ye floods,
       And windy waves of woods;
     Ye valleys and wild vineyards, ye lit lakes
       And happier hillside brakes,
     Untrampled by the accursed feet that trod
       Fields golden from their god,
     Fields of their god forsaken, whereof none
       Sees his face in the sun,
     Hears his voice from the floweriest wildernesses;
       And, barren of his tresses,
     Ye bays unplucked and laurels unentwined,
       That no men break or bind,
     And myrtles long forgetful of the sword,
       And olives unadored,
     Wisdom and love, white hands that save and slay,
       Praise him; and ye as they,
     Praise him, O gracious might of dews and rains
       That feed the purple plains,
     O sacred sunbeams bright as bare steel drawn,
       O cloud and fire and dawn;
     Red hills of flame, white Alps, green Apennines,
       Banners of blowing pines,
     Standards of stormy snows, flags of light leaves,
       Three wherewith Freedom weaves
     One ensign that once woven and once unfurled
       Makes day of all a world,
     Makes blind their eyes who knew not, and outbraves
       The waste of iron waves;
     Ye fields of yellow fullness, ye fresh fountains,
       And mists of many mountains;
     Ye moons and seasons, and ye days and nights;
       Ye starry-headed heights,
     And gorges melting sunward from the snow,
       And all strong streams that flow,
     Tender as tears, and fair as faith, and pure
       As hearts made sad and sure
     At once by many sufferings and one love;
       O mystic deathless dove
     Held to the heart of earth and in her hands
       Cherished, O lily of lands,
     White rose of time, dear dream of praises past--
       For such as these thou wast,
     That art as eagles setting to the sun,
       As fawns that leap and run,
     As a sword carven with keen floral gold,
       Sword for an armed god's hold,
     Flower for a crowned god's forehead--O our land,
       Reach forth thine holiest hand,
     O mother of many sons and memories,
       Stretch out thine hand to his
     That raised and gave thee life to run and leap
       When thou wast full of sleep,
     That touched and stung thee with young blood and breath
       When thou wast hard on death.
     Praise him, O all her cities and her crowns,
       Her towers and thrones of towns;
     O noblest Brescia, scarred from foot to head
       And breast-deep in thy dead,
     Praise him from all the glories of thy graves
       That yellow Mela laves
     With gentle and golden water, whose fair flood
       Ran wider with thy blood:
     Praise him, O born of that heroic breast,
       O nursed thereat and blest,
     Verona, fairer than thy mother fair,
     But not more brave to bear:
       Praise him, O Milan, whose imperial tread
     Bruised once the German head;
       Whose might, by northern swords left desolate,
     Set foot on fear and fate:
       Praise him, O long mute mouth of melodies,
     Mantua, with louder keys,
       With mightier chords of music even than rolled
     From the large harps of old,
       When thy sweet singer of golden throat and tongue,
     Praising his tyrant, sung;
       Though now thou sing not as of other days,
     Learn late a better praise.
       Not with the sick sweet lips of slaves that sing,
     Praise thou no priest or king,
       No brow-bound laurel of discoloured leaf,
     But him, the crownless chief.
       Praise him, O star of sun-forgotten times,
     Among their creeds and crimes
       That wast a fire of witness in the night,
     Padua, the wise men's light:
       Praise him, O sacred Venice, and the sea
     That now exults through thee,
       Full of the mighty morning and the sun,
     Free of things dead and done;
       Praise him from all the years of thy great grief,
     That shook thee like a leaf
       With winds and snows of torment, rain that fell
     Red as the rains of hell,
       Storms of black thunder and of yellow flame,
     And all ill things but shame;
       Praise him with all thy holy heart and strength;
     Through thy walls' breadth and length
       Praise him with all thy people, that their voice
     Bid the strong soul rejoice,
       The fair clear supreme spirit beyond stain,
     Pure as the depth of pain,
       High as the head of suffering, and secure
     As all things that endure.
       More than thy blind lord of an hundred years
     Whose name our memory hears,
       Home-bound from harbours of the Byzantine
     Made tributary of thine,
       Praise him who gave no gifts from oversea,
     But gave thyself to thee.
       O mother Genoa, through all years that run,
     More than that other son,
       Who first beyond the seals of sunset prest
     Even to the unfooted west,
       Whose back-blown flag scared from, their sheltering seas
     The unknown Atlantides,
       And as flame climbs through cloud and vapour clomb
     Through streams of storm and foam,
       Till half in sight they saw land heave and swim--
     More than this man praise him.
       One found a world new-born from virgin sea;
     And one found Italy.
       O heavenliest Florence, from the mouths of flowers
     Fed by melodious hours,
       From each sweet mouth that kisses light and air,
     Thou whom thy fate made fair,
       As a bound vine or any flowering tree,
     Praise him who made thee free.
       For no grape-gatherers trampling out the wine
     Tread thee, the fairest vine;
       For no man binds thee, no man bruises, none
     Does with thee as these have done.
       From where spring hears loud through her long lit vales
     Triumphant nightingales,
       In many a fold of fiery foliage hidden,
     Withheld as things forbidden,
       But clamorous with innumerable delight
     In May's red, green, and white,
       In the far-floated standard of the spring,
     That bids men also sing,
       Our flower of flags, our witness that we are free,
     Our lamp for land and sea;
       From where Majano feels through corn and vine
     Spring move and melt as wine,
       And Fiesole's embracing arms enclose
     The immeasurable rose;
       From hill-sides plumed with pine, and heights wind-worn
     That feel the refluent morn,
       Or where the moon's face warm and passionate
     Burns, and men's hearts grow great,
       And the swoln eyelids labour with sweet tears,
     And in their burning ears
       Sound throbs like flame, and in their eyes new light
     Kindles the trembling night;
       From faint illumined fields and starry valleys
     Wherefrom the hill-wind sallies,
       From Vallombrosa, from Valdarno raise
     One Tuscan tune of praise.
       O lordly city of the field of death,
     Praise him with equal breath,
       From sleeping streets and gardens, and the stream
     That threads them as a dream
       Threads without light the untravelled ways of sleep
     With eyes that smile or weep;
       From the sweet sombre beauty of wave and wall
     That fades and does not fall;
       From coloured domes and cloisters fair with fame,
     Praise thou and thine his name.
       Thou too, O little laurelled town of towers,
     Clothed with the flame of flowers,
       From windy ramparts girdled with young gold,
     From thy sweet hillside fold
       Of wallflowers and the acacia's belted bloom
     And every blowing plume,
       Halls that saw Dante speaking, chapels fair
     As the outer hills and air,
       Praise him who feeds the fire that Dante fed,
     Our highest heroic head,
       Whose eyes behold through floated cloud and flame
     The maiden face of fame
       Like April's in Valdelsa; fair as flowers,
     And patient as the hours;
       Sad with slow sense of time, and bright with faith
     That levels life and death;
       The final fame, that with a foot sublime
     Treads down reluctant time;
       The fame that waits and watches and is wise,
     A virgin with chaste eyes,
       A goddess who takes hands with great men's grief;
     Praise her, and him, our chief.
       Praise him, O Siena, and thou her deep green spring,
     O Fonte Branda, sing:
       Shout from the red clefts of thy fiery crags,
     Shake out thy flying flags
       In the long wind that streams from hill to hill;
     Bid thy full music fill
       The desolate red waste of sunset air
     And fields the old time saw fair,
       But now the hours ring void through ruined lands,
     Wild work of mortal hands;
       Yet through thy dead Maremma let his name
     Take flight and pass in flame,
       And the red ruin of disastrous hours
     Shall quicken into flowers.
       Praise him, O fiery child of sun and sea,
     Naples, who bade thee be;
       For till he sent the swords that scourge and save,
     Thou wast not, but thy grave.
       But more than all these praise him and give thanks,
     Thou, from thy Tiber's banks,
       From all thine hills and from thy supreme dome,
     Praise him, O risen Rome.
       Let all thy children cities at thy knee
     Lift up their voice with thee,
       Saying 'for thy love's sake and our perished grief
     We laud thee, O our chief;'
       Saying 'for thine  hand  and help when hope was dead
     We thank thee, O our head;'
       Saying 'for thy voice and face within our sight
     We bless thee, O our light;
       For waters cleansing us from days defiled
     We praise thee, O our child.'

     §
     So with an hundred cities' mouths in one
       Praising thy supreme son,
     Son of thy sorrow, O mother, O maid and mother,
       Our queen, who serve none other,
     Our lady of pity and mercy, and full of grace,
       Turn otherwhere thy face,
     Turn for a little and look what things are these
       Now fallen before thy knees;
     Turn upon them thine eyes who hated thee,
       Behold what things they be,
     Italia: these are stubble that were steel,
       Dust, or a turning wheel;
     As leaves, as snow, as sand, that were so strong;
       And howl, for all their song,
     And wail, for all their wisdom; they that were
       So great, they are all stript bare,
     They are all made empty of beauty, and all abhorred;
       They are shivered and their sword;
     They are slain who slew, they are heartless who were wise;
       Yea, turn on these thine eyes,
     O thou, soliciting with soul sublime
       The obscure soul of time,
     Thou, with the wounds thy holy body bears
       From broken swords of theirs,
     Thou, with the sweet swoln eyelids that have bled
       Tears for thy thousands dead,
     And upon these, whose swords drank up like dew
       The sons of thine they slew,
     These, whose each gun blasted with murdering mouth
       Live flowers of thy fair south,
     These, whose least evil told in alien ears
       Turned men's whole blood to tears,
     These, whose least sin remembered for pure shame
       Turned all those tears to flame,
     Even upon these, when breaks the extreme blow
       And all the world cries woe,
     When heaven reluctant rains long-suffering fire
       On these and their desire,
     When his wind shakes them and his waters whelm
       Who rent thy robe and realm,
     When they that poured thy dear blood forth as wine
       Pour forth their own for thine,
     On these, on these have mercy: not in hate,
       But full of sacred fate,
     Strong from the shrine and splendid from the god,
       Smite, with no second rod.
     Because they spared not, do thou rather spare:
       Be not one thing they were.
     Let not one tongue of theirs who hate thee say
       That thou wast even as they.
     Because their hands were bloody, be thine white;
       Show light where they shed night:
     Because they are foul, be thou the rather pure;
       Because they are feeble, endure;
     Because they had no pity, have thou pity.
       And thou, O supreme city,
     O priestless Rome that shall be, take in trust
       Their names, their deeds, their dust,
     Who held life less than thou wert; be the least
       To thee indeed a priest,
     Priest and burnt-offering and blood-sacrifice
       Given without prayer or price,
     A holier immolation than men wist,
       A costlier eucharist,
     A sacrament more saving; bend thine head
       Above these many dead
     Once, and salute with thine eternal eyes
       Their lowest head that lies.
     Speak from thy lips of immemorial speech
       If but one word for each.
     Kiss but one kiss on each thy dead son's mouth
       Fallen dumb or north or south.
     And laying but once thine hand on brow and breast,
       Bless them, through whom thou art blest.
     And saying in ears of these thy dead, "Well done,"
       Shall they not hear "O son"?
     And bowing thy face to theirs made pale for thee,
       Shall the shut eyes not see?
     Yea, through the hollow-hearted world of death,
       As light, as blood, as breath,
     Shall there not flash and flow the fiery sense,
       The pulse of prescience?
     Shall not these know as in times overpast
       Thee loftiest to the last?
     For times and wars shall change, kingdoms and creeds,
       And dreams of men, and deeds;
     Earth shall grow grey with all her golden things,
       Pale peoples and hoar kings;
     But though her thrones and towers of nations fall,
       Death has no part in all;
     In the air, nor in the imperishable sea,
       Nor heaven, nor truth, nor thee.
     Yea, let all sceptre-stricken nations lie,
       But live thou though they die;
     Let their flags fade as flowers that storm can mar,
       But thine be like a star;
     Let England's, if it float not for men free,
       Fall, and forget the sea;
     Let France's, if it shadow a hateful head,
       Drop as a leaf drops dead;
     Thine let what storm soever smite the rest
       Smite as it seems him best;
     Thine let the wind that can, by sea or land,
       Wrest from thy banner-hand.
     Die they in whom dies freedom, die and cease,
       Though the world weep for these;
     Live thou and love and lift when these lie dead
       The green and white and red.

     §
     O our Republic that shalt bind in bands
       The kingdomless far lands
     And link the chainless ages; thou that wast
       With England ere she past
     Among the faded nations, and shalt be
       Again, when sea to sea
     Calls through the wind and light of morning time,
       And throneless clime to clime
     Makes antiphonal answer; thou that art
       Where one man's perfect heart
     Burns, one man's brow is brightened for thy sake,
       Thine, strong to make or break;
     O fair Republic hallowing with stretched hands
       The limitless free lands,
     When all men's heads for love, not fear, bow down
       To thy sole royal crown,
     As thou to freedom; when man's life smells sweet,
       And at thy bright swift feet
     A bloodless and a bondless world is laid;
       Then, when thy men are made,
     Let these indeed as we in dreams behold
       One chosen of all thy fold,
     One of all fair things fairest, one exalt
       Above all fear or fault,
     One unforgetful of unhappier men
       And us who loved her then;
     With eyes that outlook suns and dream on graves;
       With voice like quiring waves;
     With heart the holier for their memories' sake
       Who slept that she might wake;
     With breast the sweeter for that sweet blood lost,
       And all the milkless cost;
     Lady of earth, whose large equality
       Bends but to her and thee;
     Equal with heaven, and infinite of years,
       And splendid from quenched tears;
     Strong with old strength of great things fallen and fled,
       Diviner for her dead;
     Chaste of all stains and perfect from all scars,
       Above all storms and stars,
     All winds that blow through time, all waves that foam,
       Our Capitolian Rome.

     1867.




ODE ON THE PROCLAMATION OF THE FRENCH REPUBLIC


     To: VICTOR HUGO

     (Greek: ailenon ailenon eipe, to d' eu nikato)



     STROPHE 1

     With songs and crying and sounds of acclamations,
       Lo, the flame risen, the fire that falls in showers!
     Hark; for the word is out among the nations:
       Look; for the light is up upon the hours:
     O fears, O shames, O many tribulations,
       Yours were all yesterdays, but this day ours.
     Strong were your bonds linked fast with lamentations,
       With groans and tears built into walls and towers;
     Strong were your works and wonders of high stations,
       Your forts blood-based, and rampires of your powers:
     Lo now the last of divers desolations,
       The hand of time, that gathers hosts like flowers;
     Time, that fills up and pours out generations;
       Time, at whose breath confounded empire cowers.



     STROPHE 2

        What are these moving in the dawn's red gloom?
        What is she waited on by dread and doom,
     Ill ministers of morning, bondmen born of night?
        If that head veiled and bowed be morning's head,
        If she come walking between doom and dread,
     Who shall rise up with song and dance before her sight?

        Are not the night's dead heaped about her feet?
        Is not death swollen, and slaughter full of meat?
     What, is their feast a bride-feast, where men sing and dance?
        A bitter, a bitter bride-song and a shrill
        Should the house raise that such bride-followers fill,
     Wherein defeat weds ruin, and takes for bride-bed France.

        For nineteen years deep shame and sore desire
        Fed from men's hearts with hungering fangs of fire,
     And hope fell sick with famine for the food of change.
        Now is change come, but bringing funeral urns;
        Now is day nigh, but the dawn blinds and burns;
     Now time long dumb hath language, but the tongue is strange.

        We that have seen her not our whole lives long,
        We to whose ears her dirge was cradle-song,
     The dirge men sang who laid in earth her living head,
        Is it by such light that we live to see
        Rise, with rent hair and raiment, Liberty?
     Does her grave open only to restore her dead?

        Ah, was it this we looked for, looked and prayed,
        This hour that treads upon the prayers we made,
     This ravening hour that breaks down good and ill alike?
        Ah, was it thus we thought to see her and hear,
        The one love indivisible and dear?
     Is it her head that hands which strike down wrong must strike?



     STROPHE 3

     Where is hope, and promise where, in all these things,
     Shocks of strength with strength, and jar of hurtling kings?
       Who of all men, who will show us any good?
     Shall these lightnings of blind battles give men light?
     Where is freedom? who will bring us in her sight,
       That have hardly seen her footprint where she stood?



     STROPHE 4

     Who is this that rises red with wounds and splendid,
       All her breast and brow made beautiful with scars,
     Burning bare as naked daylight, undefended,
       In her hands for spoils her splintered prison-bars,
     In her eyes the light and fire of long pain ended,
       In her lips a song as of the morning stars?



     STROPHE 5

          O torn out of thy trance,
          O deathless, O my France,
     O many-wounded mother, O redeemed to reign!
          O rarely sweet and bitter
          The bright brief tears that glitter
     On thine unclosing eyelids, proud of their own pain;
          The beautiful brief tears
          That wash the stains of years
     White as the names immortal of thy chosen and slain.
          O loved so much so long,
          O smitten with such wrong,
     O purged at last and perfect without spot or stain,
          Light of the light of man,
          Reborn republican,
     At last, O first Republic, hailed in heaven again!
          Out of the obscene eclipse
          Rerisen, with burning lips
     To witness for us if we looked for thee in vain.


     STROPHE 6

     Thou wast the light whereby men saw
     Light, thou the trumpet of the law
       Proclaiming manhood to mankind;
       And what if all these years were blind
     And shameful? Hath the sun a flaw
     Because one hour hath power to draw
       Mist round him wreathed as links to bind?
     And what if now keen anguish drains
     The very wellspring of thy veins
       And very spirit of thy breath?
     The life outlives them and disdains;
     The sense which makes the soul remains,
       And blood of thought which travaileth
     To bring forth hope with procreant pains.
     O thou that satest bound in chains
     Between thine hills and pleasant plains
       As whom his own soul vanquisheth,
     Held in the bonds of his own thought,
     Whence very death can take off nought,
       Nor sleep, with bitterer dreams than death,
     What though thy thousands at thy knees
     Lie thick as grave-worms feed on these,
     Though thy green fields and joyous places
     Are populous with blood-blackening faces
       And wan limbs eaten by the sun?
     Better an end of all men's races,
       Better the world's whole work were done,
     And life wiped out of all our traces,
       And there were left to time not one,
     Than such as these that fill thy graves
     Should sow in slaves the seed of slaves.



     ANTISTROPHE 1

     Not of thy sons, O mother many-wounded,
       Not of thy sons are slaves ingrafted and grown.
     Was it not thine, the fire whence light rebounded
       From kingdom on rekindling kingdom thrown,
     From hearts confirmed on tyrannies confounded,
       From earth on heaven, fire mightier than his own?
     Not thine the breath wherewith time's clarion sounded,
       And all the terror in the trumpet blown?
     The voice whereat the thunders stood astounded
       As at a new sound of a God unknown?
     And all the seas and shores within them bounded
       Shook at the strange speech of thy lips alone,
     And all the hills of heaven, the storm-surrounded,
       Trembled, and all the night sent forth a groan.



     ANTISTROPHE 2

       What hast thou done that such an hour should be
       More than another clothed with blood to thee?
     Thou hast seen many a bloodred hour before this one.
       What art thou that thy lovers should misdoubt?
       What is this hour that it should cast hope out?
     If hope turn back and fall from thee, what hast thou done?

       Thou hast done ill against thine own soul; yea,
       Thine own soul hast thou slain and burnt away,
     Dissolving it with poison into foul thin fume.
       Thine own life and creation of thy fate
       Thou hast set thine hand to unmake and discreate;
     And now thy slain soul rises between dread and doom.

       Yea, this is she that comes between them led;
       That veiled head is thine own soul's buried head,
     The head that was as morning's in the whole world's sight.
       These wounds are deadly on thee, but deadlier
       Those wounds the ravenous poison left on her;
     How shall her weak hands hold thy weak hands up to fight?

       Ah, but her fiery eyes, her eyes are these
       That, gazing, make thee shiver to the knees
     And the blood leap within thee, and the strong joy rise.
       What, doth her sight yet make thine heart to dance?
       O France, O freedom, O the soul of France,
     Are ye then quickened, gazing in each other's eyes?

       Ah, and her words, the words wherewith she sought thee
       Sorrowing, and bare in hand the robe she wrought thee
     To wear when soul and body were again made one,
       And fairest among women, and a bride,
       Sweet-voiced to sing the bridegroom to her side,
     The spirit of man, the bridegroom brighter than the sun!



     ANTISTROPHE 3

     Who shall help me? who shall take me by the hand?
     Who shall teach mine eyes to see, my feet to stand,
       Now my foes have stripped and wounded me by night?
     Who shall heal me? who shall come to take my part?
     Who shall set me as a seal upon his heart,
       As a seal upon his arm made bare for fight?



     ANTISTROPHE 4

     If thou know not, O thou fairest among women,
       If thou see not where the signs of him abide,
     Lift thine eyes up to the light that stars grow dim in,
       To the morning whence he comes to take thy side.
     None but he can bear the light that love wraps him in,
       When he comes on earth to take himself a bride.


     ANTISTROPHE 5

            Light of light, name of names,
            Whose shadows are live flames,
     The soul that moves the wings of worlds upon their way;
            Life, spirit, blood and breath
            In time and change and death
     Substant through strength and weakness, ardour and decay;
            Lord of the lives of lands,
            Spirit of man, whose hands
     Weave the web through wherein man's centuries fall as prey;
            That art within our will
            Power to make, save, and kill,
     Knowledge and choice, to take extremities and weigh;
            In the soul's hand to smite
            Strength, in the soul's eye sight;
     That to the soul art even as is the soul to clay;
            Now to this people be
            Love; come, to set them free,
     With feet that tread the night, with eyes that sound the day.



     ANTISTROPHE 6

     Thou that wast on their fathers dead
     As effluent God effused and shed,
       Heaven to be handled, hope made flesh,
       Break for them now time's iron mesh;
     Give them thyself for hand and head,
     Thy breath for life, thy love for bread,
       Thy thought for spirit to refresh,
     Thy bitterness to pierce and sting,
     Thy sweetness for a healing spring.
       Be to them knowledge, strength, life, light,
     Thou to whose feet the centuries cling
     And in the wide warmth of thy wing
       Seek room and rest as birds by night,
     O thou the kingless people's king,
     To whom the lips of silence sing,
     Called by thy name of thanksgiving
       Freedom, and by thy name of might
     Justice, and by thy secret name
     Love; the same need is on the same
       Men, be the same God in their sight!
     From this their hour of bloody tears
     Their praise goes up into thine ears,
     Their bruised lips clothe thy name with praises,
     The song of thee their crushed voice raises,
       Their grief seeks joy for psalms to borrow,
     With tired feet seeks her through time's mazes
       Where each day's blood leaves pale the morrow,
     And from their eyes in thine there gazes
       A spirit other far than sorrow--
     A soul triumphal, white and whole
     And single, that salutes thy soul.



     EPODE

     All the lights of the sweet heaven that sing together;
       All the years of the green earth that bare man free;
     Rays and lightnings of the fierce or tender weather,
       Heights and lowlands, wastes and headlands of the sea,
     Dawns and sunsets, hours that hold the world in tether,
       Be our witnesses and seals of things to be.
     Lo the mother, the Republic universal,
       Hands that hold time fast, hands feeding men with might,
     Lips that sing the song of the earth, that make rehearsal
       Of all seasons, and the sway of day with night,
     Eyes that see as from a mountain the dispersal,
       The huge ruin of things evil, and the flight;
     Large exulting limbs, and bosom godlike moulded
       Where the man-child hangs, and womb wherein he lay;
     Very life that could it die would leave the soul dead,
       Face whereat all fears and forces flee away,
     Breath that moves the world as winds a flower-bell folded,
       Feet that trampling the gross darkness beat out day.
              In the hour of pain and pity,
              Sore spent, a wounded city,
     Her foster-child seeks to her, stately where she stands;
              In the utter hour of woes,
              Wind-shaken, blind with blows,
     Paris lays hold upon her, grasps her with child's hands;
              Face kindles face with fire,
              Hearts take and give desire,
     Strange joy breaks red as tempest on tormented lands.
              Day to day, man to man,
              Plights love republican,
     And faith and memory burn with passion toward each other;
              Hope, with fresh heavens to track,
              Looks for a breath's space back,
     Where the divine past years reach hands to this their brother;
              And souls of men whose death
              Was light to her and breath
     Send word of love yet living to the living mother.
              They call her, and she hears;
              O France, thy marvellous years,
     The years of the strong travail, the triumphant time,
              Days terrible with love,
              Red-shod with flames thereof,
     Call to this hour that breaks in pieces crown and crime;
              The hour with feet to spurn,
              Hands to crush, fires to burn
     The state whereto no latter foot of man shall climb.
              Yea, come what grief, now may
              By ruinous night or day,
     One grief there cannot, one the first and last grief, shame.
              Come force to break thee and bow
              Down, shame can come not now,
     Nor, though hands wound thee, tongues make mockery of thy name:
              Come swords and scar thy brow,
              No brand there burns it now,
     No spot but of thy blood marks thy white-fronted fame.
              Now, though the mad blind morrow
              With shafts of iron sorrow
     Should split thine heart, and whelm thine head with sanguine waves;
              Though all that draw thy breath
              Bled from all veins to death,
     And thy dead body were the grave of all their graves,
              And thine unchilded womb
              For all their tombs a tomb,
     At least within thee as on thee room were none for slaves.
              This power thou hast, to be,
              Come death or come not, free;
     That in all tongues of time's this praise be chanted of thee,
              That in thy wild worst hour
              This power put in thee power,
     And moved as hope around and hung as heaven above thee,
              And while earth sat in sadness
              In only thee put gladness,
     Put strength and love, to make all hearts of ages love thee.
              That in death's face thy chant
              Arose up jubilant,
     And thy great heart with thy great peril grew more great:
              And sweet for bitter tears
              Put out the fires of fears,
     And love made lovely for thee loveless hell and hate;
              And they that house with error,
              Cold shame and burning terror,
     Fled from truth risen and thee made mightier than thy fate.
              This shall all years remember;
              For this thing shall September
     Have only name of honour, only sign of white.
              And this year's fearful name,
              France, in thine house of fame
     Above all names of all thy triumphs shalt thou write,
              When, seeing thy freedom stand
              Even at despair's right hand,
     The cry thou gavest at heart was only of delight.




DIRAE

     Guai a voi, anime prave.
                       Dante.

     Soyez maudits, d'abord d'être ce que vous êtes,
     Et puis soyez maudits d'obséder les poëtes!
                                        Victor Hugo.



     I

     A DEAD  KING

     _Ferdinand II entered Malebolge May 22nd, 1859._


     Go down to hell. This end is good to see;
       The breath is lightened and the sense at ease
       Because thou art not; sense nor breath there is
     In what thy body was, whose soul shall be
     Chief nerve of hell's pained heart eternally.
       Thou art abolished from the midst of these
       That are what thou wast: Pius from his knees
     Blows off the dust that flecked them, bowed for thee.
     Yea, now the long-tongued slack-lipped litanies
       Fail, and the priest has no more prayer to sell--
     Now the last Jesuit found about thee is
       The beast that made thy fouler flesh his cell--
     Time lays his finger on thee, saying, "Cease;
       Here is no room for thee; go down to hell."



     II

     A YEAR AFTER


     If blood throbs yet in this that was thy face,
       O thou whose soul was full of devil's faith,
       If in thy flesh the worm's bite slackeneth
     In some acute red pause of iron days,
     Arise now, gird thee, get thee on thy ways,
       Breathe off the worm that crawls and fears not breath;
       King, it may be thou shalt prevail on death;
     King, it may be thy soul shall find out grace.
     O spirit that hast eased the place of Cain,
     Weep now and howl, yea weep now sore; for this
     That was thy kingdom hath spat out its king.
     Wilt thou plead now with God? behold again,
     Thy prayer for thy son's sake is turned to a hiss,
     Thy mouth to a snake's whose slime outlives the sting,



     III

     PETER'S PENCE FROM PERUGIA


     Iscariot, thou grey-grown beast of blood,
       Stand forth to plead; stand, while red drops run here
       And there down fingers shaken with foul fear,
     Down the sick shivering chin that stooped and sued,
     Bowed to the bosom, for a little food
       At Herod's hand, who smites thee cheek and ear.
       Cry out, Iscariot; haply he will hear;
     Cry, till he turn again to do thee good.
     Gather thy gold up, Judas, all thy gold,
       And buy thee death; no Christ is here to sell,
     But the dead earth of poor men bought and sold,
       While year heaps year above thee safe in hell,
     To grime thy grey dishonourable head
     With dusty shame, when thou art damned and dead.



     IV

     PAPAL ALLOCUTION

     "Popule mi, quid tibi feci?"


     What hast thou done? Hark, till thine ears wax hot,
       Judas; for these and these things hast thou done.
       Thou hast made earth faint, and sickened the sweet sun,
     With fume of blood that reeks from limbs that rot;
     Thou hast washed thine hands and mouth, saying, "Am I not
       Clean?" and thy lips were bloody, and there was none
       To speak for man against thee, no, not one;
     This hast thou done to us, Iscariot.
     Therefore, though thou be deaf and heaven be dumb,
       A cry shall be from under to proclaim
         In the ears of all who shed men's blood or sell
     Pius the Ninth, Judas the Second, come
       Where Boniface out of the filth and flame
         Barks for his advent in the clefts of hell. (i)

     (i) Dante, "Inferno," xix. 53.




     V


     THE BURDEN OF AUSTRIA

     1866


     O daughter of pride, wasted with misery,
       With all the glory that thy shame put on
       Stripped off thy shame, O daughter of Babylon,
     Yea, whoso be it, yea, happy shall he be
     That as thou hast served us hath rewarded thee.
       Blessed, who throweth against war's boundary stone
       Thy warrior brood, and breaketh bone by bone
     Misrule thy son, thy daughter Tyranny.
     That landmark shalt thou not remove for shame,
       But sitting down there in a widow's weed
     Wail; for what fruit is now of thy red fame?
       Have thy sons too and daughters learnt indeed
       What thing it is to weep, what thing to bleed?
     Is it not thou that now art but a name? (ii)

     (ii) "A geographical expression."--Metternich of Italy.



     VI

     LOCUSTA


     Come close and see her and hearken. This is she.
       Stop the ways fast against the stench that nips
       Your nostril as it nears her. Lo, the lips
     That between prayer and prayer find time to be
     Poisonous, the hands holding a cup and key,
       Key of deep hell, cup whence blood reeks and drips;
       The loose lewd limbs, the reeling hingeless hips,
     The scurf that is not skin but leprosy.
     This haggard harlot grey of face and green
     With the old hand's cunning mixes her new priest
     The cup she mixed her Nero, stirred and spiced.
     She lisps of Mary and Jesus Nazarene
     With a tongue tuned, and head that bends to the east,
     Praying. There are who say she is bride of Christ.




     VII

     CELAENO


     The blind king hides his weeping eyeless head,
       Sick with the helpless hate and shame and awe,
       Till food have choked the glutted hell-bird's craw
     And the foul cropful creature lie as dead
     And soil itself with sleep and too much bread:
       So the man's life serves under the beast's law,
       And things whose spirit lives in mouth and maw
     Share shrieking the soul's board and soil her bed,
     Till man's blind spirit, their sick slave, resign
     Its kingdom to the priests whose souls are swine,
       And the scourged serf lie reddening from their rod,
     Discrowned, disrobed, dismantled, with lost eyes
     Seeking where lurks in what conjectural skies
       That triple-headed hound of hell their God.




     VIII

     A CHOICE


     Faith is the spirit that makes man's body and blood
       Sacred, to crown when life and death have ceased
       His heavenward head for high fame's holy feast;
     But as one swordstroke swift as wizard's rod
     Made Caesar carrion and made Brutus God,
       Faith false or true, born patriot or born priest,
       Smites into semblance or of man or beast
     The soul that feeds on clean or unclean food.
     Lo here the faith that lives on its own light,
       Visible music; and lo there, the foul
       Shape without shape, the harpy throat and howl.
     Sword of the spirit of man! arise and smite,
       And sheer through throat and claw and maw and tongue
       Kill the beast faith that lives on its own dung.




     IX

     THE AUGURS


     Lay the corpse out on the altar; bid the elect
       Slaves clear the ways of service spiritual,
       Sweep clean the stalled soul's serviceable stall,
     Ere the chief priest's dismantling hands detect
     The ulcerous flesh of faith all scaled and specked
       Beneath the bandages that hid it all,
       And with sharp edgetools oecumenical
     The leprous carcases of creeds dissect.
     As on the night ere Brutus grew divine
     The sick-souled augurs found their ox or swine
       Heartless; so now too by their after art
     In the same Rome, at an uncleaner shrine,
       Limb from rank limb, and putrid part from part,
       They carve the corpse--a beast without a heart.




     X

     A COUNSEL


     O strong Republic of the nobler years
       Whose white feet shine beside time's fairer flood
       That shall flow on the clearer for our blood
     Now shed, and the less brackish for our tears;
     When time and truth have put out hopes and fears
       With certitude, and love has burst the bud,
       If these whose powers then down the wind shall scud
     Still live to feel thee smite their eyes and ears,
     When thy foot's tread hath crushed their crowns and creeds,
     Care thou not then to crush the beast that bleeds,
       The snake whose belly cleaveth to the sod,
     Nor set thine heel on men as on their deeds;
       But let the worm Napoleon crawl untrod,
       Nor grant Mastai the gallows of his God.

     1869.



     XI

     THE MODERATES


     _Virtutem videant intabescantque relicta_.

     She stood before her traitors bound and bare,
       Clothed with her wounds and with her naked shame
       As with a weed of fiery tears and flame,
     Their mother-land, their common weal and care,
     And they turned from her and denied, and sware
       They did not know this woman nor her name.
       And they took truce with tyrants and grew tame,
     And gathered up cast crowns and creeds to wear,
     And rags and shards regilded. Then she took
       In her bruised hands their broken pledge, and eyed
       These men so late so loud upon her side
     With one inevitable and tearless look,
     That they might see her face whom they forsook;
       And they beheld what they had left, and died.

     February 1870.




     XII

     INTERCESSION

     _Ave Caesar Imperator, moriturum te saluto._

     1

     O Death, a little more, and then the worm;
       A little longer, O Death, a little yet,
       Before the grave gape and the grave-worm fret;
     Before the sanguine-spotted hand infirm
     Be rottenness, and that foul brain, the germ
       Of all ill things and thoughts, be stopped and set;
       A little while, O Death, ere he forget,
     A small space more of life, a little term;
     A little longer ere he and thou be met,
       Ere in that hand that fed thee to thy mind
     The poison-cup of life be overset;
         A little respite of disastrous breath,
       Till the soul lift up her lost eyes, and find
         Nor God nor help nor hope, but thee, O Death.


     2

     Shall a man die before his dying day,
       Death? and for him though the utter day be nigh,
       Not yet, not yet we give him leave to die;
     We give him grace not yet that men should say
     He is dead, wiped out, perished and past away.
       Till the last bitterness of life go by,
       Thou shalt not slay him; till those last dregs run dry,
     O thou last lord of life! thou shalt not slay.
     Let the lips live a little while and lie,
       The hand a little, and falter, and fail of strength,
     And the soul shudder and sicken at the sky;
         Yea, let him live, though God nor man would let
       Save for the curse' sake; then at bitter length,
         Lord, will we yield him to thee, but not yet.


     3

     Hath he not deeds to do and days to see
       Yet ere the day that is to see him dead?
       Beats there no brain yet in the poisonous head,
     Throbs there no treason? if no such thing there be,
     If no such thought, surely this is not he.
       Look to the hands then; are the hands not red?
       What are the shadows about this man's bed?
     Death, was not this the cupbearer to thee?
     Nay, let him live then, till in this life's stead
       Even he shall pray for that thou hast to give;
     Till seeing his hopes and not his memories fled
         Even he shall cry upon thee a bitter cry,
       That life is worse than death; then let him live,
         Till death seem worse than life; then let him die.

     4

     O watcher at the guardless gate of kings,
       O doorkeeper that serving at their feast
       Hast in thine hand their doomsday drink, and seest
     With eyeless sight the soul of unseen things;
     Thou in whose ear the dumb time coming sings,
       Death, priest and king that makest of king and priest
       A name, a dream, a less thing than the least,
     Hover awhile above him with closed wings,
     Till the coiled soul, an evil snake-shaped beast,
       Eat its base bodily lair of flesh away;
     If haply, or ever its cursed life have ceased,
         Or ever thy cold hands cover his head
       From sight of France and freedom and broad day,
         He may see these and wither and be dead.

     Paris: September 1869.



     XIII

     THE SAVIOUR OF SOCIETY

     1


     O son of man, but of what man who knows?
       That broughtest healing on thy leathern wings
       To priests, and under them didst gather kings,
     And madest friends to thee of all man's foes;
     Before thine incarnation, the tale goes,
       Thy virgin mother, pure of sensual stings,
       Communed by night with angels of chaste things,
     And, full of grace, untimely felt the throes
     Of motherhood upon her, and believed
       The obscure annunciation made when late
         A raven-feathered raven-throated dove
         Croaked salutation to the mother of love
       Whose misconception was immaculate,
     And when her time was come she misconceived.


     2

     Thine incarnation was upon this wise,
       Saviour; and out of east and west were led
       To thy foul cradle by thy planet red
     Shepherds of souls that feed their sheep with lies
     Till the utter soul die as the body dies,
       And the wise men that ask but to be fed
       Though the hot shambles be their board and bed
     And sleep on any dunghill shut their eyes,
     So they lie warm and fatten in the mire:
       And the high priest enthroned yet in thy name,
     Judas, baptised thee with men's blood for hire;
       And now thou hangest nailed to thine own shame
       In sight of all time, but while heaven has flame
     Shalt find no resurrection from hell-fire.

     December 1869.




     XIV

     MENTANA: SECOND ANNIVERSARY

     Est-ce qu'il n'est pas temps que la foudre se prouve,
     Cieux profonds, en broyant ce chien, fils de la louve?
                          La Légende des Siècles:--Ratbert.

     1


     By the dead body of Hope, the spotless lamb
       Thou threwest into the high priest's slaughtering-room,
       And by the child Despair born red therefrom
     As, thank the secret sire picked out to cram
     With spurious spawn thy misconceiving dam,
       Thou, like a worm from a town's common tomb,
       Didst creep from forth the kennel of her womb,
     Born to break down with catapult and ram
     Man's builded towers of promise, and with breath
     And tongue to track and hunt his hopes to death:
       O, by that sweet dead body abused and slain,
     And by that child mismothered,--dog, by all
     Thy curses thou hast cursed mankind withal,
       With what curse shall man curse thee back again?


     2

     By the brute soul that made man's soul its food;
       By time grown poisonous with it; by the hate
       And horror of all souls not miscreate;
     By the hour of power that evil hath on good;
     And by the incognizable fatherhood
       Which made a whorish womb the shameful gate
       That opening let out loose to fawn on fate
     A hound half-blooded ravening for man's blood;
     (What prayer but this for thee should any say,
     Thou dog of hell, but this that Shakespeare said?)
     By night deflowered and desecrated day,
       That fall as one curse on one cursed head,
     "Cancel his bond of life, dear God, I pray,
       That I may live to say, The dog is dead!"

     1869.




     XV

     MENTANA: THIRD ANNIVERSARY

     1


     Such prayers last year were put up for thy sake;
       What shall this year do that hath lived to see
       The piteous and unpitied end of thee?
     What moan, what cry, what clamour shall it make,
     Seeing as a reed breaks all thine empire break,
       And all thy great strength as a rotten tree,
       Whose branches made broad night from sea to sea,
     And the world shuddered when a leaf would shake?
     From the unknown deep wherein those prayers were heard,
     From the dark height of time there sounds a word,
     Crying, Comfort; though death ride on this red hour,
       Hope waits with eyes that make the morning dim,
     Till liberty, reclothed with love and power,
       Shall pass and know not if she tread on him.


     2

     The hour for which men hungered and had thirst,
       And dying were loth to die before it came,
       Is it indeed upon thee? and the lame
     Late foot of vengeance on thy trace accurst
     For years insepulchred and crimes inhearsed,
       For days marked red or black with blood or shame,
       Hath it outrun thee to tread out thy name?
     This scourge, this hour, is this indeed the worst?
     O clothed and crowned with curses, canst thou tell?
       Have thy dead whispered to thee what they see
       Whose eyes are open in the dark on thee
     Ere spotted soul and body take farewell
       Or what of life beyond the worm's may be
     Satiate the immitigable hours in hell?

     1870.




     XVI

     THE DESCENT INTO HELL

     January 9th, 1873

     1

     O Night and death, to whom we grudged him then,
       When in man's sight he stood not yet undone,
       Your king, your priest, your saviour, and your son,
     We grudge not now, who know that not again
     Shall this curse come upon the sins of men,
       Nor this face look upon the living sun
       That shall behold not so abhorred an one
     In all the days whereof his eye takes ken.
     The bond is cancelled, and the prayer is heard
       That seemed so long but weak and wasted breath;
       Take him, for he is yours, O night and death.
     Hell yawns on him whose life was as a word
       Uttered by death in hate of heaven and light,
       A curse now dumb upon the lips of night.


     2

     What shapes are these and shadows without end
       That fill the night full as a storm of rain
       With myriads of dead men and women slain,
     Old with young, child with mother, friend with friend,
     That on the deep mid wintering air impend,
       Pale yet with mortal wrath and human pain,
       Who died that this man dead now too might reign,
     Toward whom their hands point and their faces bend?
     The ruining flood would redden earth and air
       If for each soul whose guiltless blood was shed
       There fell but one drop on this one man's head
     Whose soul to-night stands bodiless and bare,
     For whom our hearts give thanks who put up prayer,
       That we have lived to say, The dog is dead.




     XVII

     APOLOGIA


     If wrath embitter the sweet mouth of song,
       And make the sunlight fire before those eyes
       That would drink draughts of peace from the unsoiled skies,
     The wrongdoing is not ours, but ours the wrong,
     Who hear too loud on earth and see too long
       The grief that dies not with the groan that dies,
       Till the strong bitterness of pity cries
     Within us, that our anger should be strong.
     For chill is known by heat and heat by chill,
     And the desire that hope makes love to still
       By the fear flying beside it or above,
       A falcon fledged to follow a fledgeling dove,
     And by the fume and flame of hate of ill
       The exuberant light and burning bloom of love.








End of Project Gutenberg's Songs Of Two Nations, by Algernon Charles Swinburne

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SONGS OF TWO NATIONS ***

***** This file should be named 8127-8.txt or 8127-8.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/8/1/2/8127/

Produced by Mark Sherwood, Marc D'Hooghe and Delphine Lettau

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
  www.gutenberg.org/license.


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at 809
North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887.  Email
contact links and up to date contact information can be found at the
Foundation's web site and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit:  www.gutenberg.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For forty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


﻿The Project Gutenberg EBook of Poems & Ballads (Second Series), by 
Algernon Charles Swinburne

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Poems & Ballads (Second Series)
       Swinburne's Poems Volume III

Author: Algernon Charles Swinburne

Release Date: December 4, 2008 [EBook #27401]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK POEMS & BALLADS (SECOND SERIES) ***




Produced by Paul Murray, Christina and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net










Poems and Ballads
Second Series

By
Algernon Charles Swinburne

Taken from The Collected Poetical Works of Algernon Charles
Swinburne--Vol. III



SWINBURNE'S POETICAL WORKS


    I. POEMS AND BALLADS (First Series).

   II. SONGS BEFORE SUNRISE and SONGS OF TWO NATIONS.

  III. POEMS AND BALLADS (Second and Third Series), and SONGS OF THE
       SPRINGTIDES.

   IV. TRISTRAM OF LYONESSE, THE TALE OF BALEN, ATALANTA IN CALYDON,
       ERECHTHEUS.

    V. STUDIES IN SONG, A CENTURY OF ROUNDELS, SONNETS ON ENGLISH DRAMATIC
       POETS, THE HEPTALOGIA, ETC.

   VI. A MIDSUMMER HOLIDAY, ASTROPHEL, A CHANNEL PASSAGE AND OTHER POEMS



LONDON: WILLIAM HEINEMANN



Poems and Ballads
Second Series

By
Algernon Charles Swinburne

Taken from The Collected Poetical Works of Algernon Charles
Swinburne--Vol. III


1917
LONDON: WILLIAM HEINEMANN




_First printed (Chatto), 1904_
_Reprinted 1904, '05, '10, '12_
_(Heinemann), 1917_

London: William Heinemann, 1917




CONTENTS


POEMS AND BALLADS

Second Series

  The Last Oracle                                              5

  In the Bay                                                  11

  A Forsaken Garden                                           22

  Relics                                                      26

  At a Month's End                                            29

  Sestina                                                     34

  The Year of the Rose                                        36

  A Wasted Vigil                                              39

  The Complaint of Lisa                                       42

  For the Feast of Giordano Bruno                             48

  Ave Atque Vale                                              50

  Memorial Verses on the Death of Théophile Gautier           58

  Sonnet (with a Copy of _Mademoiselle de Maupin_)            66

  Age and Song (to Barry Cornwall)                            67

  In Memory of Barry Cornwall                                 69

  Epicede                                                     72

  To Victor Hugo                                              74

  Inferiae                                                    75

  A Birth-Song                                                77

  Ex-Voto                                                     81

  A Ballad of Dreamland                                       85

  Cyril Tourneur                                              87

  A Ballad of François Villos                                 88

  Pastiche                                                    90

  Before Sunset                                               92

  Song                                                        93

  A Vision of Spring in Winter                                94

  Choriambics                                                 98

  At Parting                                                 100

  A Song in Season                                           101

  Two Leaders                                                107

  Victor Hugo in 1877                                        109

  Child's Song                                               110

  Triads                                                     111

  Four Songs of Four Seasons:--

      I. Winter in Northumberland                            113

     II. Spring in Tuscany                                   122

    III. Summer in Auvergne                                  125

     IV. Autumn in Cornwall                                  127

  The White Czar                                             129

  Rizpah                                                     131

  To Louis Kossuth                                           132

  Translations from the French of Villon:--

      The Complaint of the Fair Armouress                    133

      A Double Ballad of Good Counsel                        137

      Fragment on Death                                      139

      Ballad of the Lords of Old Time                        140

      Ballad of the Women of Paris                           142

      Ballad written for a Bridegroom                        144

      Ballad against the Enemies of France                   146

      The Dispute of the Heart and Body of François Villon   148

      Epistle in form of a Ballad to his Friends             150

      The Epitaph in form of a Ballad                        152

  From Victor Hugo                                           154

  Nocturne                                                   155

  Théophile Gautier                                          157

  Ode                                                        158

  In Obitom Theophili Poetæ                                  160

  Ad Catullum                                                161

  Dedication, 1878                                           162




POEMS AND BALLADS

SECOND SERIES

VOL. III.




INSCRIBED

TO

RICHARD F. BURTON

IN REDEMPTION OF AN OLD PLEDGE AND IN RECOGNITION OF A FRIENDSHIP WHICH I
MUST ALWAYS COUNT AMONG THE HIGHEST HONOURS OF MY LIFE




THE LAST ORACLE

(A.D. 361)


[Greek:
eipate tô basilêi, chamai pese daidalos aula;
ouketi Phoibos echei kaluban, ou mantida daphnên,
ou pagan laleousan; apesbeto kai lalon hudôr.]


Years have risen and fallen in darkness or in twilight,
  Ages waxed and waned that knew not thee nor thine,
While the world sought light by night and sought not thy light,
  Since the sad last pilgrim left thy dark mid shrine.
Dark the shrine and dumb the fount of song thence welling,
  Save for words more sad than tears of blood, that said:
_Tell the king, on earth has fallen the glorious dwelling,_
  _And the watersprings that spake are quenched and dead._
_Not a cell is left the God, no roof, no cover_
  _In his hand the prophet laurel flowers no more._
And the great king's high sad heart, thy true last lover,
  Felt thine answer pierce and cleave it to the core.
      And he bowed down his hopeless head
        In the drift of the wild world's tide,
      And dying, _Thou hast conquered_, he said,
        _Galilean_; he said it, and died.
      And the world that was thine and was ours
      When the Graces took hands with the Hours
      Grew cold as a winter wave
      In the wind from a wide-mouthed grave,
      As a gulf wide open to swallow
        The light that the world held dear.
    O father of all of us, Paian, Apollo,
        Destroyer and healer, hear!

Age on age thy mouth was mute, thy face was hidden,
  And the lips and eyes that loved thee blind and dumb;
Song forsook their tongues that held thy name forbidden,
  Light their eyes that saw the strange God's kingdom come.
Fire for light and hell for heaven and psalms for pæans
  Filled the clearest eyes and lips most sweet of song,
When for chant of Greeks the wail of Galileans
  Made the whole world moan with hymns of wrath and wrong.
Yea, not yet we see thee, father, as they saw thee,
  They that worshipped when the world was theirs and thine,
They whose words had power by thine own power to draw thee
  Down from heaven till earth seemed more than heaven divine.
      For the shades are about us that hover
        When darkness is half withdrawn
      And the skirts of the dead night cover
        The face of the live new dawn.
      For the past is not utterly past
      Though the word on its lips be the last,
      And the time be gone by with its creed
      When men were as beasts that bleed,
      As sheep or as swine that wallow,
        In the shambles of faith and of fear.
    O father of all of us, Paian, Apollo,
        Destroyer and healer, hear!

Yet it may be, lord and father, could we know it,
  We that love thee for our darkness shall have light
More than ever prophet hailed of old or poet
  Standing crowned and robed and sovereign in thy sight.
To the likeness of one God their dreams enthralled thee,
  Who wast greater than all Gods that waned and grew;
Son of God the shining son of Time they called thee,
  Who wast older, O our father, than they knew.
For no thought of man made Gods to love or honour
  Ere the song within the silent soul began,
Nor might earth in dream or deed take heaven upon her
  Till the word was clothed with speech by lips of man.
      And the word and the life wast thou,
        The spirit of man and the breath;
        And before thee the Gods that bow
      Take life at thine hands and death.
      For these are as ghosts that wane,
      That are gone in an age or twain;
      Harsh, merciful, passionate, pure,
      They perish, but thou shalt endure;
      Be their flight with the swan or the swallow,
        They pass as the flight of a year.
    O father of all of us, Paian, Apollo,
        Destroyer and healer, hear!

Thou the word, the light, the life, the breath, the glory,
  Strong to help and heal, to lighten and to slay,
Thine is all the song of man, the world's whole story;
  Not of morning and of evening is thy day.
Old and younger Gods are buried or begotten
  From uprising to downsetting of thy sun,
Risen from eastward, fallen to westward and forgotten,
  And their springs are many, but their end is one.
Divers births of godheads find one death appointed,
  As the soul whence each was born makes room for each;
God by God goes out, discrowned and disanointed,
  But the soul stands fast that gave them shape and speech.
      Is the sun yet cast out of heaven?
        Is the song yet cast out of man?
      Life that had song for its leaven
        To quicken the blood that ran
      Through the veins of the songless years
      More bitter and cold than tears,
      Heaven that had thee for its one
      Light, life, word, witness, O sun,
      Are they soundless and sightless and hollow,
        Without eye, without speech, without ear?
    O father of all of us, Paian, Apollo,
        Destroyer and healer, hear!

Time arose and smote thee silent at his warning,
  Change and darkness fell on men that fell from thee;
Dark thou satest, veiled with light, behind the morning,
  Till the soul of man should lift up eyes and see.
Till the blind mute soul get speech again and eyesight,
  Man may worship not the light of life within;
In his sight the stars whose fires grow dark in thy sight
  Shine as sunbeams on the night of death and sin.
Time again is risen with mightier word of warning,
  Change hath blown again a blast of louder breath;
Clothed with clouds and stars and dreams that melt in morning,
  Lo, the Gods that ruled by grace of sin and death!
      They are conquered, they break, they are stricken,
        Whose might made the whole world pale;
      They are dust that shall rise not or quicken
        Though the world for their death's sake wail.
      As a hound on a wild beast's trace,
      So time has their godhead in chase;
      As wolves when the hunt makes head,
      They are scattered, they fly, they are fled;
      They are fled beyond hail, beyond hollo,
        And the cry of the chase, and the cheer.
    O father of all of us, Paian, Apollo,
        Destroyer and healer, hear!

Day by day thy shadow shines in heaven beholden,
 Even the sun, the shining shadow of thy face:
King, the ways of heaven before thy feet grow golden;
  God, the soul of earth is kindled with thy grace.
In thy lips the speech of man whence Gods were fashioned,
  In thy soul the thought that makes them and unmakes;
By thy light and heat incarnate and impassioned,
  Soul to soul of man gives light for light and takes.
As they knew thy name of old time could we know it,
  Healer called of sickness, slayer invoked of wrong,
Light of eyes that saw thy light, God, king, priest, poet,
  Song should bring thee back to heal us with thy song.
      For thy kingdom is past not away,
        Nor thy power from the place thereof hurled;
      Out of heaven they shall cast not the day,
        They shall cast not out song from the world.
      By the song and the light they give
      We know thy works that they live;
      With the gift thou hast given us of speech
      We praise, we adore, we beseech,
      We arise at thy bidding and follow,
        We cry to thee, answer, appear,
    O father of all of us, Paian, Apollo,
        Destroyer and healer, hear!



IN THE BAY


I

Beyond the hollow sunset, ere a star
Take heart in heaven from eastward, while the west,
Fulfilled of watery resonance and rest,
Is as a port with clouds for harbour bar
To fold the fleet in of the winds from far
That stir no plume now of the bland sea's breast:


II

Above the soft sweep of the breathless bay
Southwestward, far past flight of night and day,
Lower than the sunken sunset sinks, and higher
Than dawn can freak the front of heaven with fire,
My thought with eyes and wings made wide makes way
To find the place of souls that I desire.


III

If any place for any soul there be,
Disrobed and disentrammelled; if the might,
The fire and force that filled with ardent light
The souls whose shadow is half the light we see,
Survive and be suppressed not of the night;
This hour should show what all day hid from me.


IV

Night knows not, neither is it shown to day,
By sunlight nor by starlight is it shown,
Nor to the full moon's eye nor footfall known,
Their world's untrodden and unkindled way.
Nor is the breath nor music of it blown
With sounds of winter or with winds of May.


V

But here, where light and darkness reconciled
Hold earth between them as a weanling child
Between the balanced hands of death and birth,
Even as they held the new-born shape of earth
When first life trembled in her limbs and smiled,
Here hope might think to find what hope were worth.


VI

Past Hades, past Elysium, past the long
Slow smooth strong lapse of Lethe--past the toil
Wherein all souls are taken as a spoil,
The Stygian web of waters--if your song
Be quenched not, O our brethren, but be strong
As ere ye too shook off our temporal coil;


VII

If yet these twain survive your worldly breath,
Joy trampling sorrow, life devouring death,
If perfect life possess your life all through
And like your words your souls be deathless too,
To-night, of all whom night encompasseth,
My soul would commune with one soul of you.


VIII

Above the sunset might I see thine eyes
That were above the sundawn in our skies,
Son of the songs of morning,--thine that were
First lights to lighten that rekindling air
Wherethrough men saw the front of England rise
And heard thine loudest of the lyre-notes there--


IX

If yet thy fire have not one spark the less,
O Titan, born of her a Titaness,
Across the sunrise and the sunset's mark
Send of thy lyre one sound, thy fire one spark,
To change this face of our unworthiness,
Across this hour dividing light from dark.


X

To change this face of our chill time, that hears
No song like thine of all that crowd its ears,
Of all its lights that lighten all day long
Sees none like thy most fleet and fiery sphere's
Outlightening Sirius--in its twilight throng
No thunder and no sunrise like thy song.


XI

Hath not the sea-wind swept the sea-line bare
To pave with stainless fire through stainless air
A passage for thine heavenlier feet to tread
Ungrieved of earthly floor-work? hath it spread
No covering splendid as the sun-god's hair
To veil or to reveal thy lordlier head?


XII

Hath not the sunset strewn across the sea
A way majestical enough for thee?
What hour save this should be thine hour--and mine,
If thou have care of any less divine
Than thine own soul; if thou take thought of me,
Marlowe, as all my soul takes thought of thine?


XIII

Before the moon's face as before the sun
The morning star and evening star are one
For all men's lands as England. O, if night
Hang hard upon us,--ere our day take flight,
Shed thou some comfort from thy day long done
On us pale children of the latter light!


XIV

For surely, brother and master and lord and king,
Where'er thy footfall and thy face make spring
In all souls' eyes that meet thee wheresoe'er,
And have thy soul for sunshine and sweet air--
Some late love of thine old live land should cling,
Some living love of England, round thee there.


XV

Here from her shore across her sunniest sea
My soul makes question of the sun for thee,
And waves and beams make answer. When thy feet
Made her ways flowerier and their flowers more sweet
With childlike passage of a god to be,
Like spray these waves cast off her foemen's fleet.


XVI

Like foam they flung it from her, and like weed
Its wrecks were washed from scornful shoal to shoal,
From rock to rock reverberate; and the whole
Sea laughed and lightened with a deathless deed
That sowed our enemies in her field for seed
And made her shores fit harbourage for thy soul.


XVII

Then in her green south fields, a poor man's child,
Thou hadst thy short sweet fill of half-blown joy,
That ripens all of us for time to cloy
With full-blown pain and passion; ere the wild
World caught thee by the fiery heart, and smiled
To make so swift end of the godlike boy.


XVIII

For thou, if ever godlike foot there trod
These fields of ours, wert surely like a god.
Who knows what splendour of strange dreams was shed
With sacred shadow and glimmer of gold and red
From hallowed windows, over stone and sod,
On thine unbowed bright insubmissive head?


XIX

The shadow stayed not, but the splendour stays,
Our brother, till the last of English days.
No day nor night on English earth shall be
For ever, spring nor summer, Junes nor Mays,
But somewhat as a sound or gleam of thee
Shall come on us like morning from the sea.


XX

Like sunrise never wholly risen, nor yet
Quenched; or like sunset never wholly set,
A light to lighten as from living eyes
The cold unlit close lids of one that lies
Dead, or a ray returned from death's far skies
To fire us living lest our lives forget.


XXI

For in that heaven what light of lights may be,
What splendour of what stars, what spheres of flame
Sounding, that none may number nor may name,
We know not, even thy brethren; yea, not we
Whose eyes desire the light that lightened thee,
Whose ways and thine are one way and the same.


XXII

But if the riddles that in sleep we read,
And trust them not, be flattering truth indeed,
As he that rose our mightiest called them,--he,
Much higher than thou as thou much higher than we--
There, might we say, all flower of all our seed,
All singing souls are as one sounding sea.


XXIII

All those that here were of thy kind and kin,
Beside thee and below thee, full of love,
Full-souled for song,--and one alone above
Whose only light folds all your glories in--
With all birds' notes from nightingale to dove
Fill the world whither we too fain would win.


XXIV

The world that sees in heaven the sovereign light
Of sunlike Shakespeare, and the fiery night
Whose stars were watched of Webster; and beneath,
The twin-souled brethren of the single wreath,
Grown in kings' gardens, plucked from pastoral heath,
Wrought with all flowers for all men's heart's delight.


XXV

And that fixed fervour, iron-red like Mars,
In the mid moving tide of tenderer stars,
That burned on loves and deeds the darkest done,
Athwart the incestuous prisoner's bride-house bars;
And thine, most highest of all their fires but one,
Our morning star, sole risen before the sun.


XXVI

And one light risen since theirs to run such race
Thou hast seen, O Phosphor, from thy pride of place.
Thou hast seen Shelley, him that was to thee
As light to fire or dawn to lightning; me,
Me likewise, O our brother, shalt thou see,
And I behold thee, face to glorious face?


XXVII

You twain the same swift year of manhood swept
Down the steep darkness, and our father wept.
And from the gleam of Apollonian tears
A holier aureole rounds your memories, kept
Most fervent-fresh of all the singing spheres,
And April-coloured through all months and years.


XXVIII

You twain fate spared not half your fiery span;
The longer date fulfils the lesser man.
Ye from beyond the dark dividing date
Stand smiling, crowned as gods with foot on fate.
For stronger was your blessing than his ban,
And earliest whom he struck, he struck too late.


XXIX

Yet love and loathing, faith and unfaith yet
Bind less to greater souls in unison,
And one desire that makes three spirits as one
Takes great and small as in one spiritual net
Woven out of hope toward what shall yet be done
Ere hate or love remember or forget.


XXX

Woven out of faith and hope and love too great
To bear the bonds of life and death and fate:
Woven out of love and hope and faith too dear
To take the print of doubt and change and fear:
And interwoven with lines of wrath and hate
Blood-red with soils of many a sanguine year.


XXXI

Who cannot hate, can love not; if he grieve,
His tears are barren as the unfruitful rain
That rears no harvest from the green sea's plain,
And as thorns crackling this man's laugh is vain.
Nor can belief touch, kindle, smite, reprieve
His heart who has not heart to disbelieve.


XXXII

But you, most perfect in your hate and love,
Our great twin-spirited brethren; you that stand
Head by head glittering, hand made fast in hand,
And underfoot the fang-drawn worm that strove
To wound you living; from so far above,
Look love, not scorn, on ours that was your land.


XXXIII

For love we lack, and help and heat and light
To clothe us and to comfort us with might.
What help is ours to take or give? but ye--
O, more than sunrise to the blind cold sea,
That wailed aloud with all her waves all night,
Much more, being much more glorious, should you be.


XXXIV

As fire to frost, as ease to toil, as dew
To flowerless fields, as sleep to slackening pain,
As hope to souls long weaned from hope again
Returning, or as blood revived anew
To dry-drawn limbs and every pulseless vein,
Even so toward us should no man be but you.


XXXV

One rose before the sunrise was, and one
Before the sunset, lovelier than the sun.
And now the heaven is dark and bright and loud
With wind and starry drift and moon and cloud,
And night's cry rings in straining sheet and shroud,
What help is ours if hope like yours be none?


XXXVI

O well-beloved, our brethren, if ye be,
Then are we not forsaken. This kind earth
Made fragrant once for all time with your birth,
And bright for all men with your love, and worth
The clasp and kiss and wedlock of the sea,
Were not your mother if not your brethren we.


XXXVII

Because the days were dark with gods and kings
And in time's hand the old hours of time as rods,
When force and fear set hope and faith at odds,
Ye failed not nor abased your plume-plucked wings;
And we that front not more disastrous things,
How should we fail in face of kings and gods?


XXXVIII

For now the deep dense plumes of night are thinned
Surely with winnowing of the glimmering wind
Whose feet are fledged with morning; and the breath
Begins in heaven that sings the dark to death.
And all the night wherein men groaned and sinned
Sickens at heart to hear what sundawn saith.


XXXIX

O first-born sons of hope and fairest, ye
Whose prows first clove the thought-unsounded sea
Whence all the dark dead centuries rose to bar
The spirit of man lest truth should make him free,
The sunrise and the sunset, seeing one star,
Take heart as we to know you that ye are.


XL

Ye rise not and ye set not; we that say
Ye rise and set like hopes that set and rise
Look yet but seaward from a land-locked bay;
But where at last the sea's line is the sky's
And truth and hope one sunlight in your eyes,
No sunrise and no sunset marks their day.



A FORSAKEN GARDEN


In a coign of the cliff between lowland and highland,
  At the sea-down's edge between windward and lee,
Walled round with rocks as an inland island,
  The ghost of a garden fronts the sea.
A girdle of brushwood and thorn encloses
  The steep square slope of the blossomless bed
Where the weeds that grew green from the graves of its roses
        Now lie dead.

The fields fall southward, abrupt and broken,
  To the low last edge of the long lone land.
If a step should sound or a word be spoken,
  Would a ghost not rise at the strange guest's hand?
So long have the grey bare walks lain guestless,
  Through branches and briars if a man make way,
He shall find no life but the sea-wind's, restless
        Night and day.

The dense hard passage is blind and stifled
  That crawls by a track none turn to climb
To the strait waste place that the years have rifled
  Of all but the thorns that are touched not of time.
The thorns he spares when the rose is taken;
  The rocks are left when he wastes the plain.
The wind that wanders, the weeds wind-shaken,
        These remain.

Not a flower to be pressed of the foot that falls not;
  As the heart of a dead man the seed-plots are dry;
From the thicket of thorns whence the nightingale calls not,
  Could she call, there were never a rose to reply.
Over the meadows that blossom and wither
  Rings but the note of a sea-bird's song;
Only the sun and the rain come hither
        All year long.

The sun burns sere and the rain dishevels
  One gaunt bleak blossom of scentless breath.
Only the wind here hovers and revels
  In a round where life seems barren as death.
Here there was laughing of old, there was weeping,
  Haply, of lovers none ever will know,
Whose eyes went seaward a hundred sleeping
        Years ago.

Heart handfast in heart as they stood, "Look thither,"
  Did he whisper? "look forth from the flowers to the sea;
For the foam-flowers endure when the rose-blossoms wither,
  And men that love lightly may die--but we?"
And the same wind sang and the same waves whitened,
  And or ever the garden's last petals were shed,
In the lips that had whispered, the eyes that had lightened,
        Love was dead.

Or they loved their life through, and then went whither?
  And were one to the end--but what end who knows?
Love deep as the sea as a rose must wither,
  As the rose-red seaweed that mocks the rose.
Shall the dead take thought for the dead to love them?
  What love was ever as deep as a grave?
They are loveless now as the grass above them
        Or the wave.

All are at one now, roses and lovers,
  Not known of the cliffs and the fields and the sea.
Not a breath of the time that has been hovers
  In the air now soft with a summer to be.
Not a breath shall there sweeten the seasons hereafter
  Of the flowers or the lovers that laugh now or weep,
When as they that are free now of weeping and laughter
        We shall sleep.

Here death may deal not again for ever;
  Here change may come not till all change end.
From the graves they have made they shall rise up never,
  Who have left nought living to ravage and rend.
Earth, stones, and thorns of the wild ground growing,
  While the sun and the rain live, these shall be;
Till a last wind's breath upon all these blowing
        Roll the sea.

Till the slow sea rise and the sheer cliff crumble,
  Till terrace and meadow the deep gulfs drink,
Till the strength of the waves of the high tides humble
  The fields that lessen, the rocks that shrink,
Here now in his triumph where all things falter,
  Stretched out on the spoils that his own hand spread,
As a god self-slain on his own strange altar,
        Death lies dead.



RELICS


This flower that smells of honey and the sea,
White laurustine, seems in my hand to be
  A white star made of memory long ago
Lit in the heaven of dear times dead to me.

A star out of the skies love used to know
Here held in hand, a stray left yet to show
  What flowers my heart was full of in the days
That are long since gone down dead memory's flow.

Dead memory that revives on doubtful ways,
Half hearkening what the buried season says
  Out of the world of the unapparent dead
Where the lost Aprils are, and the lost Mays.

Flower, once I knew thy star-white brethren bred
Nigh where the last of all the land made head
  Against the sea, a keen-faced promontory,
Flowers on salt wind and sprinkled sea-dews fed.

Their hearts were glad of the free place's glory;
The wind that sang them all his stormy story
  Had talked all winter to the sleepless spray,
And as the sea's their hues were hard and hoary.

Like things born of the sea and the bright day,
They laughed out at the years that could not slay,
  Live sons and joyous of unquiet hours,
And stronger than all storms that range for prey.

And in the close indomitable flowers
A keen-edged odour of the sun and showers
  Was as the smell of the fresh honeycomb
Made sweet for mouths of none but paramours.

Out of the hard green wall of leaves that clomb
They showed like windfalls of the snow-soft foam,
  Or feathers from the weary south-wind's wing,
Fair as the spray that it came shoreward from.

And thou, as white, what word hast thou to bring?
If my heart hearken, whereof wilt thou sing?
  For some sign surely thou too hast to bear,
Some word far south was taught thee of the spring.

White like a white rose, not like these that were
Taught of the wind's mouth and the winter air,
  Poor tender thing of soft Italian bloom,
Where once thou grewest, what else for me grew there?

Born in what spring and on what city's tomb,
By whose hand wast thou reached, and plucked for whom?
  There hangs about thee, could the soul's sense tell,
An odour as of love and of love's doom.

Of days more sweet than thou wast sweet to smell,
Of flower-soft thoughts that came to flower and fell,
  Of loves that lived a lily's life and died,
Of dreams now dwelling where dead roses dwell.

O white birth of the golden mountain-side
That for the sun's love makes its bosom wide
  At sunrise, and with all its woods and flowers
Takes in the morning to its heart of pride!

Thou hast a word of that one land of ours,
And of the fair town called of the Fair Towers,
  A word for me of my San Gimignan,
A word of April's greenest-girdled hours.

Of the old breached walls whereon the wallflowers ran
Called of Saint Fina, breachless now of man,
  Though time with soft feet break them stone by stone,
Who breaks down hour by hour his own reign's span.

Of the old cliff overcome and overgrown
That all that flowerage clothed as flesh clothes bone,
  That garment of acacias made for May,
Whereof here lies one witness overblown.

The fair brave trees with all their flowers at play,
How king-like they stood up into the day!
  How sweet the day was with them, and the night!
Such words of message have dead flowers to say.

This that the winter and the wind made bright,
And this that lived upon Italian light,
  Before I throw them and these words away,
Who knows but I what memories too take flight?



AT A MONTH'S END


The night last night was strange and shaken:
  More strange the change of you and me.
Once more, for the old love's love forsaken,
  We went out once more toward the sea.

For the old love's love-sake dead and buried,
  One last time, one more and no more,
We watched the waves set in, the serried
  Spears of the tide storming the shore.

Hardly we saw the high moon hanging,
  Heard hardly through the windy night
Far waters ringing, low reefs clanging,
  Under wan skies and waste white light.

With chafe and change of surges chiming,
  The clashing channels rocked and rang
Large music, wave to wild wave timing,
  And all the choral water sang.

Faint lights fell this way, that way floated,
  Quick sparks of sea-fire keen like eyes
From the rolled surf that flashed, and noted
  Shores and faint cliffs and bays and skies.

The ghost of sea that shrank up sighing
  At the sand's edge, a short sad breath
Trembling to touch the goal, and dying
  With weak heart heaved up once in death--

The rustling sand and shingle shaken
  With light sweet touches and small sound--
These could not move us, could not waken
  Hearts to look forth, eyes to look round.

Silent we went an hour together,
  Under grey skies by waters white.
Our hearts were full of windy weather,
  Clouds and blown stars and broken light.

Full of cold clouds and moonbeams drifted
  And streaming storms and straying fires,
Our souls in us were stirred and shifted
  By doubts and dreams and foiled desires.

Across, aslant, a scudding sea-mew
  Swam, dipped, and dropped, and grazed the sea:
And one with me I could not dream you;
  And one with you I could not be.

As the white wing the white wave's fringes
  Touched and slid over and flashed past--
As a pale cloud a pale flame tinges
  From the moon's lowest light and last--

As a star feels the sun and falters,
  Touched to death by diviner eyes--
As on the old gods' untended altars
  The old lire of withered worship dies--

(Once only, once the shrine relighted
  Sees the last fiery shadow shine,
Last shadow of flame and faith benighted,
  Sees falter and flutter and fail the shrine)

So once with fiery breath and flying
  Your winged heart touched mine and went,
And the swift spirits kissed, and sighing,
  Sundered and smiled and were content.

That only touch, that feeling only,
  Enough we found, we found too much;
For the unlit shrine is hardly lonely
  As one the old fire forgets to touch.

Slight as the sea's sight of the sea-mew,
  Slight as the sun's sight of the star:
Enough to show one must not deem you
  For love's sake other than you are.

Who snares and tames with fear and danger
  A bright beast of a fiery kin,
Only to mar, only to change her
  Sleek supple soul and splendid skin?

Easy with blows to mar and maim her,
  Easy with bonds to bind and bruise;
What profit, if she yield her tamer
  The limbs to mar, the soul to lose?

Best leave or take the perfect creature,
  Take all she is or leave complete;
Transmute you will not form or feature,
  Change feet for wings or wings for feet.

Strange eyes, new limbs, can no man give her;
  Sweet is the sweet thing as it is.
No soul she hath, we see, to outlive her;
  Hath she for that no lips to kiss?

So may one read his weird, and reason,
  And with vain drugs assuage no pain.
For each man in his loving season
  Fools and is fooled of these in vain.

Charms that allay not any longing,
  Spells that appease not any grief,
Time brings us all by handfuls, wronging
  All hurts with nothing of relief.

Ah, too soon shot, the fool's bolt misses!
  What help? the world is full of loves;
Night after night of running kisses,
  Chirp after chirp of changing doves.

Should Love disown or disesteem you
  For loving one man more or less?
You could not tame your light white sea-mew,
  Nor I my sleek black pantheress.

For a new soul let whoso please pray,
  We are what life made us, and shall be.
For you the jungle and me the sea-spray,
  And south for you and north for me.

But this one broken foam-white feather
  I throw you off the hither wing,
Splashed stiff with sea-scurf and salt weather,
  This song for sleep to learn and sing--

Sing in your ear when, daytime over,
  You, couched at long length on hot sand
With some sleek sun-discoloured lover,
  Wince from his breach as from a brand:

Till the acrid hour aches out and ceases,
  And the sheathed eyeball sleepier swims,
The deep flank smoothes its dimpling creases.
  And passion loosens all the limbs:

Till dreams of sharp grey north-sea weather
  Fall faint upon your fiery sleep,
As on strange sands a strayed bird's feather
  The wind may choose to lose or keep.

But I, who leave my queen of panthers,
  As a tired honey-heavy bee
Gilt with sweet dust from gold-grained anthers
  Leaves the rose-chalice, what for me?

From the ardours of the chaliced centre,
  From the amorous anthers' golden grime,
That scorch and smutch all wings that enter,
  I fly forth hot from honey-time.

But as to a bee's gilt thighs and winglets
  The flower-dust with the flower-smell clings;
As a snake's mobile rampant ringlets
  Leave the sand marked with print of rings;

So to my soul in surer fashion
  Your savage stamp and savour hangs;
The print and perfume of old passion,
  The wild-beast mark of panther's fangs.



SESTINA


I saw my soul at rest upon a day
  As a bird sleeping in the nest of night,
Among soft leaves that give the starlight way
  To touch its wings but not its eyes with light;
So that it knew as one in visions may,
  And knew not as men waking, of delight.

This was the measure of my soul's delight;
  It had no power of joy to fly by day,
Nor part in the large lordship of the light;
  But in a secret moon-beholden way
Had all its will of dreams and pleasant night,
  And all the love and life that sleepers may.

But such life's triumph as men waking may
  It might not have to feed its faint delight
Between the stars by night and sun by day,
  Shut up with green leaves and a little light;
Because its way was as a lost star's way,
  A world's not wholly known of day or night.

All loves and dreams and sounds and gleams of night
  Made it all music that such minstrels may,
And all they had they gave it of delight;
  But in the full face of the fire of day
What place shall be for any starry light,
  What part of heaven in all the wide sun's way?

Yet the soul woke not, sleeping by the way,
  Watched as a nursling of the large-eyed night,
And sought no strength nor knowledge of the day,
  Nor closer touch conclusive of delight,
Nor mightier joy nor truer than dreamers may,
  Nor more of song than they, nor more of light.

For who sleeps once and sees the secret light
  Whereby sleep shows the soul a fairer way
Between the rise and rest of day and night,
  Shall care no more to fare as all men may,
But be his place of pain or of delight,
  There shall he dwell, beholding night as day.

Song, have thy day and take thy fill of light
  Before the night be fallen across thy way;
Sing while he may, man hath no long delight.



THE YEAR OF THE ROSE


From the depths of the green garden-closes
Where the summer in darkness dozes
  Till autumn pluck from his hand
  An hour-glass that holds not a sand;
From the maze that a flower-belt encloses
  To the stones and sea-grass on the strand
How red was the reign of the roses
  Over the rose-crowned land!

The year of the rose is brief;
From the first blade blown to the sheaf,
  From the thin green leaf to the gold,
  It has time to be sweet and grow old,
To triumph and leave not a leaf
  For witness in winter's sight
  How lovers once in the light
Would mix their breath with its breath,
  And its spirit was quenched not of night,
As love is subdued not of death.

In the red-rose land not a mile
Of the meadows from stile to stile,
  Of the valleys from stream to stream,
  But the air was a long sweet dream
And the earth was a sweet wide smile
  Red-mouthed of a goddess, returned
  From the sea which had borne her and burned,
That with one swift smile of her mouth
  Looked full on the north as it yearned,
And the north was more than the south.

For the north, when winter was long,
In his heart had made him a song,
  And clothed it with wings of desire,
  And shod it with shoon as of fire,
To carry the tale of his wrong
  To the south-west wind by the sea.
  That none might bear it but he
To the ear of the goddess unknown
  Who waits till her time shall be
To take the world for a throne.

In the earth beneath, and above
In the heaven where her name is love,
  She warms with light from her eyes
  The seasons of life as they rise,
And her eyes are as eyes of a dove,
  But the wings that lift her and bear
  As an eagle's, and all her hair
As fire by the wind's breath curled,
  And her passage is song through the air,
And her presence is spring through the world.

So turned she northward and came,
And the white-thorn land was aflame
  With the fires that were shed from her feet,
  That the north, by her love made sweet,
Should be called by a rose-red name;
  And a murmur was heard as of doves,
  And a music beginning of loves
In the light that the roses made,
  Such light as the music loves,
The music of man with maid.

But the days drop one upon one,
And a chill soft wind is begun
  In the heart of the rose-red maze
  That weeps for the roseleaf days
And the reign of the rose undone
  That ruled so long in the light,
  And by spirit, and not by sight,
Through the darkness thrilled with its breath,
  Still ruled in the viewless night,
As love might rule over death.

The time of lovers is brief;
From the fair first joy to the grief
  That tells when love is grown old,
  From the warm wild kiss to the cold,
From the red to the white-rose leaf,
  They have but a season to seem
  As roseleaves lost on a stream
That part not and pass not apart
  As a spirit from dream to dream,
As a sorrow from heart to heart.

From the bloom and the gloom that encloses
The death-bed of Love where he dozes
  Till a relic be left not of sand
  To the hour-glass that breaks in his hand;
From the change in the grey garden-closes
  To the last stray grass of the strand,
A rain and ruin of roses
  Over the red-rose land



A WASTED VIGIL


I

Couldst thou not watch with me one hour? Behold,
Dawn skims the sea with flying feet of gold,
With sudden feet that graze the gradual sea;
    Couldst thou not watch with me?


II

What, not one hour? for star by star the night
Falls, and her thousands world by world take flight;
They die, and day survives, and what of thee?
    Couldst thou not watch with me?


III

Lo, far in heaven the web of night undone,
And on the sudden sea the gradual sun;
Wave to wave answers, tree responds to tree;
    Couldst thou not watch with me?


IV

Sunbeam by sunbeam creeps from line to line,
Foam by foam quickens on the brightening brine;
Sail by sail passes, flower by flower gets free;
    Couldst thou not watch with me?


V

Last year, a brief while since, an age ago,
A whole year past, with bud and bloom and snow,
O moon that wast in heaven, what friends were we!
    Couldst thou not watch with me?


VI

Old moons, and last year's flowers, and last year's snows!
Who now saith to thee, moon? or who saith, rose?
O dust and ashes, once found fair to see!
    Couldst thou not watch with me?


VII

O dust and ashes, once thought sweet to smell!
With me it is not, is it with thee well?
O sea-drift blown from windward back to lee!
    Couldst thou not watch with me?


VIII

The old year's dead hands are full of their dead flowers.
The old days are full of dead old loves of ours,
Born as a rose, and briefer born than she;
    Couldst thou not watch with me?


IX

Could two days live again of that dead year,
One would say, seeking us and passing here,
_Where is she?_ and one answering, _Where is he?_
    Couldst thou not watch with me?


X

Nay, those two lovers are not anywhere;
If we were they, none knows us what we were,
Nor aught of all their barren grief and glee.
    Couldst thou not watch with me?


XI

Half false, half fair, all feeble, be my verse
Upon thee not for blessing nor for curse;
For some must stand, and some must fall or flee;
    Couldst thou not watch with me?


XII

As a new moon above spent stars thou wast;
But stars endure after the moon is past.
Couldst thou not watch one hour, though I watch three?
    Couldst thou not watch with me?


XIII

What of the night? The night is full, the tide
Storms inland, the most ancient rocks divide;
Yet some endure, and bow nor head nor knee;
    Couldst thou not watch with me?


XIV

Since thou art not as these are, go thy ways;
Thou hast no part in all my nights and days.
Lie still, sleep on, be glad--as such things be;
    Thou couldst not watch with me.



THE COMPLAINT OF LISA

(_Double Sestina_)


Decameron, x. 7

There is no woman living that draws breath
So sad as I, though all things sadden her.
There is not one upon life's weariest way
Who is weary as I am weary of all but death.
Toward whom I look as looks the sunflower
All day with all his whole soul toward the sun;
While in the sun's sight I make moan all day,
And all night on my sleepless maiden bed
Weep and call out on death, O Love, and thee,
That thou or he would take me to the dead,
And know not what thing evil I have done
That life should lay such heavy hand on me.

Alas, Love, what is this thou wouldst with me?
What honour shall thou have to quench my breath,
Or what shall my heart broken profit thee?
O Love, O great god Love, what have I done,
That thou shouldst hunger so after my death?
My heart is harmless as my life's first day:
Seek out some false fair woman, and plague her
Till her tears even as my tears fill her bed:
I am the least flower in thy flowery way,
But till my time be come that I be dead
Let me live out my flower-time in the sun
Though my leaves shut before the sunflower.

O Love, Love, Love, the kingly sunflower!
Shall he the sun hath looked on look on me,
That live down here in shade, out of the sun,
Here living in the sorrow and shadow of death?
Shall he that feeds his heart full of the day
Care to give mine eyes light, or my lips breath?
Because she loves him shall my lord love her
Who is as a worm in my lord's kingly way?
I shall not see him or know him alive or dead;
But thou, I know thee, O Love, and pray to thee
That in brief while my brief life-days be done,
And the worm quickly make my marriage-bed.

For underground there is no sleepless bed:
But here since I beheld my sunflower
These eyes have slept not, seeing all night and day
His sunlike eyes, and face fronting the sun.
Wherefore if anywhere be any death,
I would fain find and fold him fast to me,
That I may sleep with the world's eldest dead,
With her that died seven centuries since, and her
That went last night down the night-wandering way.
For this is sleep indeed, when labour is done,
Without love, without dreams, and without breath,
And without thought, O name unnamed! of thee.

Ah, but, forgetting all things, shall I thee?
Wilt thou not be as now about my bed
There underground as here before the sun?
Shall not thy vision vex me alive and dead,
Thy moving vision without form or breath?
I read long since the bitter tale of her
Who read the tale of Launcelot on a day,
And died, and had no quiet after death,
But was moved ever along a weary way,
Lost with her love in the underworld; ah me,
O my king, O my lordly sunflower,
Would God to me too such a thing were done!

But if such sweet and bitter things be done,
Then, flying from life, I shall not fly from thee.
For in that living world without a sun
Thy vision will lay hold upon me dead,
And meet and mock me, and mar my peace in death.
Yet if being wroth God had such pity on her,
Who was a sinner and foolish in her day,
That even in hell they twain should breathe one breath,
Why should he not in some wise pity me?
So if I sleep not in my soft strait bed
I may look up and see my sunflower
As he the sun, in some divine strange way.

O poor my heart, well knowest thou in what way
This sore sweet evil unto us was done.
For on a holy and a heavy day
I was arisen out of my still small bed
To see the knights tilt, and one said to me
"The king," and seeing him, somewhat stopped my breath,
And if the girl spake more, I heard not her,
For only I saw what I shall see when dead,
A kingly flower of knights, a sunflower,
That shone against the sunlight like the sun,
And like a fire, O heart, consuming thee,
The fire of love that lights the pyre of death.

Howbeit I shall not die an evil death
Who have loved in such a sad and sinless way,
That this my love, lord, was no shame to thee.
So when mine eyes are shut against the sun,
O my soul's sun, O the world's sunflower,
Thou nor no man will quite despise me dead.
And dying I pray with all my low last breath
That thy whole life may be as was that day,
That feast-day that made trothplight death and me,
Giving the world light of thy great deeds done;
And that fair face brightening thy bridal bed,
That God be good as God hath been to her.

That all things goodly and glad remain with her,
All things that make glad life and goodly death;
That as a bee sucks from a sunflower
Honey, when summer draws delighted breath,
Her soul may drink of thy soul in like way,
And love make life a fruitful marriage-bed
Where day may bring forth fruits of joy to day
And night to night till days and nights be dead.
And as she gives light of her love to thee,
Give thou to her the old glory of days long done;
And either give some heat of light to me,
To warm me where I sleep without the sun.

O sunflower made drunken with the sun,
O knight whose lady's heart draws thine to her,
Great king, glad lover, I have a word to thee.
There is a weed lives out of the sun's way,
Hid from the heat deep in the meadow's bed,
That swoons and whitens at the wind's least breath,
A flower star-shaped, that all a summer day
Will gaze her soul out on the sunflower
For very love till twilight finds her dead.
But the great sunflower heeds not her poor death,
Knows not when all her loving life is done;
And so much knows my lord the king of me.

Aye, all day long he has no eye for me;
With golden eye following the golden sun
From rose-coloured to purple-pillowed bed,
From birthplace to the flame-lit place of death,
From eastern end to western of his way.
So mine eye follows thee, my sunflower,
So the white star-flower turns and yearns to thee,
The sick weak weed, not well alive or dead,
Trod underfoot if any pass by her,
Pale, without colour of summer or summer breath
In the shrunk shuddering petals, that have done
No work but love, and die before the day.

But thou, to-day, to-morrow, and every day,
Be glad and great, O love whose love slays me.
Thy fervent flower made fruitful from the sun
Shall drop its golden seed in the world's way,
That all men thereof nourished shall praise thee
For grain and flower and fruit of works well done;
Till thy shed seed, O shining sunflower,
Bring forth such growth of the world's garden-bed
As like the sun shall outlive age and death.
And yet I would thine heart had heed of her
Who loves thee alive; but not till she be dead.
Come, Love, then, quickly, and take her utmost breath.

Song, speak for me who am dumb as are the dead;
From my sad bed of tears I send forth thee,
To fly all day from sun's birth to sun's death
Down the sun's way after the flying sun,
For love of her that gave thee wings and breath,
Ere day be done, to seek the sunflower.



FOR THE FEAST OF GIORDANO BRUNO,

PHILOSOPHER AND MARTYR


I

Son of the lightning and the light that glows
    Beyond the lightning's or the morning's light,
    Soul splendid with all-righteous love of right,
In whose keen fire all hopes and fears and woes
Were clean consumed, and from their ashes rose
    Transfigured, and intolerable to sight
    Save of purged eyes whose lids had cast off night,
In love's and wisdom's likeness when they close,
Embracing, and between them truth stands fast,
    Embraced of either; thou whose feet were set
    On English earth while this was England yet,
Our friend that art, our Sidney's friend that wast,
Heart hardier found and higher than all men's past,
    Shall we not praise thee though thine own forget?


II

Lift up thy light on us and on thine own,
    O soul whose spirit on earth was as a rod
    To scourge off priests, a sword to pierce their God,
A staff for man's free thought to walk alone,
A lamp to lead him far from shrine and throne
    On ways untrodden where his fathers trod
    Ere earth's heart withered at a high priest's nod
And all men's mouths that made not prayer made moan.
From bonds and torments and the ravening flame
    Surely thy spirit of sense rose up to greet
    Lucretius, where such only spirits meet,
And walk with him apart till Shelley came
    To make the heaven of heavens more heavenly sweet
And mix with yours a third incorporate name.



AVE ATQUE VALE

IN MEMORY OF CHARLES BAUDELAIRE


Nous devrions pourtant lui porter quelques fleurs;
Les morts, les pauvres morts, ont de grandes douleurs,
Et quand Octobre souffle, émondeur des vieux arbres,
Son vent mélancolique à l'entour de leurs marbres,
Certe, ils doivent trouver les vivants bien ingrats.

_Les Fleurs du Mal._


I

Shall I strew on thee rose or rue or laurel,
    Brother, on this that was the veil of thee?
    Or quiet sea-flower moulded by the sea,
Or simplest growth of meadow-sweet or sorrel,
    Such as the summer-sleepy Dryads weave,
    Waked up by snow-soft sudden rains at eve?
Or wilt thou rather, as on earth before,
    Half-faded fiery blossoms, pale with heat
And full of bitter summer, but more sweet
    To thee than gleanings of a northern shore
    Trod by no tropic feet?


II

For always thee the fervid languid glories
    Allured of heavier suns in mightier skies;
    Thine ears knew all the wandering watery sighs
Where the sea sobs round Lesbian promontories,
    The barren kiss of piteous wave to wave
    That knows not where is that Leucadian grave
Which hides too deep the supreme head of song.
    Ah, salt and sterile as her kisses were,
    The wild sea winds her and the green gulfs bear
Hither and thither, and vex and work her wrong,
    Blind gods that cannot spare.


III

Thou sawest, in thine old singing season, brother,
    Secrets and sorrows unbeheld of us:
    Fierce loves, and lovely leaf-buds poisonous,
Bare to thy subtler eye, but for none other
    Blowing by night in some unbreathed-in clime;
    The hidden harvest of luxurious time,
Sin without shape, and pleasure without speech;
    And where strange dreams in a tumultuous sleep
    Make the shut eyes of stricken spirits weep;
And with each face thou sawest the shadow on each,
    Seeing as men sow men reap.


IV

O sleepless heart and sombre soul unsleeping,
    That were athirst for sleep and no more life
    And no more love, for peace and no more strife!
Now the dim gods of death have in their keeping
    Spirit and body and all the springs of song,
    Is it well now where love can do no wrong,
Where stingless pleasure has no foam or fang
    Behind the unopening closure of her lips?
    Is it not well where soul from body slips
And flesh from bone divides without a pang
    As dew from flower-bell drips?


V

It is enough; the end and the beginning
    Are one thing to thee, who art past the end.
    O hand unclasped of unbeholden friend,
For thee no fruits to pluck, no palms for winning,
    No triumph and no labour and no lust,
    Only dead yew-leaves and a little dust.
O quiet eyes wherein the light saith nought,
    Whereto the day is dumb, nor any night
    With obscure finger silences your sight,
Nor in your speech the sudden soul speaks thought,
    Sleep, and have sleep for light.


VI

Now all strange hours and all strange loves are over,
    Dreams and desires and sombre songs and sweet,
    Hast thou found place at the great knees and feet
Of some pale Titan-woman like a lover,
    Such as thy vision here solicited,
    Under the shadow of her fair vast head,
The deep division of prodigious breasts,
    The solemn slope of mighty limbs asleep,
    The weight of awful tresses that still keep
The savour and shade of old-world pine-forests
    Where the wet hill-winds weep?


VII

Hast thou found any likeness for thy vision?
    O gardener of strange flowers, what bud, what bloom,
    Hast thou found sown, what gathered in the gloom?
What of despair, of rapture, of derision,
    What of life is there, what of ill or good?
    Are the fruits grey like dust or bright like blood?
Does the dim ground grow any seed of ours,
    The faint fields quicken any terrene root,
    In low lands where the sun and moon are mute
And all the stars keep silence? Are there flowers
    At all, or any fruit?


VIII

Alas, but though my flying song flies after,
    O sweet strange elder singer, thy more fleet
    Singing, and footprints of thy fleeter feet,
Some dim derision of mysterious laughter
    From the blind tongueless warders of the dead,
    Some gainless glimpse of Proserpine's veiled head,
Some little sound of unregarded tears
    Wept by effaced unprofitable eyes,
    And from pale mouths some cadence of dead sighs--
These only, these the hearkening spirit hears,
    Sees only such things rise.


IX

Thou art far too far for wings of words to follow,
    Far too far off for thought or any prayer.
    What ails us with thee, who art wind and air?
What ails us gazing where all seen is hollow?
    Yet with some fancy, yet with some desire,
    Dreams pursue death as winds a flying fire,
Our dreams pursue our dead and do not find.
    Still, and more swift than they, the thin flame flies,
    The low light fails us in elusive skies,
Still the foiled earnest ear is deaf, and blind
    Are still the eluded eyes.


X

Not thee, O never thee, in all time's changes,
    Not thee, but this the sound of thy sad soul,
    The shadow of thy swift spirit, this shut scroll
I lay my hand on, and not death estranges
    My spirit from communion of thy song--
    These memories and these melodies that throng
Veiled porches of a Muse funereal--
    These I salute, these touch, these clasp and fold
    As though a hand were in my hand to hold,
Or through mine ears a mourning musical
    Of many mourners rolled.


XI

I among these, I also, in such station
    As when the pyre was charred, and piled the sods,
    And offering to the dead made, and their gods,
The old mourners had, standing to make libation,
    I stand, and to the gods and to the dead
    Do reverence without prayer or praise, and shed
Offering to these unknown, the gods of gloom,
    And what of honey and spice my seedlands bear,
    And what I may of fruits in this chilled air,
And lay, Orestes-like, across the tomb
    A curl of severed hair.


XII

But by no hand nor any treason stricken,
    Not like the low-lying head of Him, the King,
    The flame that made of Troy a ruinous thing,
Thou liest, and on this dust no tears could quicken
    There fall no tears like theirs that all men hear
    Fall tear by sweet imperishable tear
Down the opening leaves of holy poets' pages.
    Thee not Orestes, not Electra mourns;
    But bending us-ward with memorial urns
The most high Muses that fulfil all ages
    Weep, and our God's heart yearns.


XIII

For, sparing of his sacred strength, not often
    Among us darkling here the lord of light
    Makes manifest his music and his might
In hearts that open and in lips that soften
    With the soft flame and heat of songs that shine.
    Thy lips indeed he touched with bitter wine,
And nourished them indeed with bitter bread;
    Yet surely from his hand thy soul's food came,
    The fire that scarred thy spirit at his flame
Was lighted, and thine hungering heart he fed
    Who feeds our hearts with fame.


XIV

Therefore he too now at thy soul's sunsetting,
    God of all suns and songs, he too bends down
    To mix his laurel with thy cypress crown,
And save thy dust from blame and from forgetting.
    Therefore he too, seeing all thou wert and art,
    Compassionate, with sad and sacred heart,
Mourns thee of many his children the last dead,
    And hallows with strange tears and alien sighs
    Thine unmelodious mouth and sunless eyes,
And over thine irrevocable head
    Sheds light from the under skies.


XV

And one weeps with him in the ways Lethean,
    And stains with tears her changing bosom chill:
    That obscure Venus of the hollow hill,
That thing transformed which was the Cytherean,
    With lips that lost their Grecian laugh divine
    Long since, and face no more called Erycine;
A ghost, a bitter and luxurious god.
    Thee also with fair flesh and singing spell
    Did she, a sad and second prey, compel
Into the footless places once more trod,
    And shadows hot from hell.


XVI

And now no sacred staff shall break in blossom,
    No choral salutation lure to light
    A spirit sick with perfume and sweet night
And love's tired eyes and hands and barren bosom.
    There is no help for these things; none to mend
    And none to mar; not all our songs, O friend,
Will make death clear or make life durable.
    Howbeit with rose and ivy and wild vine
    And with wild notes about this dust of thine
At least I fill the place where white dreams dwell
    And wreathe an unseen shrine.


XVII

Sleep; and if life was bitter to thee, pardon,
    If sweet, give thanks; thou hast no more to live;
    And to give thanks is good, and to forgive.
Out of the mystic and the mournful garden
    Where all day through thine hands in barren braid
    Wove the sick flowers of secrecy and shade,
Green buds of sorrow and sin, and remnants grey,
    Sweet-smelling, pale with poison, sanguine-hearted,
    Passions that sprang from sleep and thoughts that started,
Shall death not bring us all as thee one day
    Among the days departed?


XVIII

For thee, O now a silent soul, my brother,
    Take at my hands this garland, and farewell.
    Thin is the leaf, and chill the wintry smell,
And chill the solemn earth, a fatal mother,
    With sadder than the Niobean womb,
    And in the hollow of her breasts a tomb.
Content thee, howsoe'er, whose days are done;
    There lies not any troublous thing before,
    Nor sight nor sound to war against thee more,
For whom all winds are quiet as the sun,
    All waters as the shore.



MEMORIAL VERSES

ON THE DEATH OF THÉOPHILE GAUTIER


Death, what hast thou to do with me? So saith
Love, with eyes set against the face of Death;
  What have I done, O thou strong Death, to thee,
That mine own lips should wither from thy breath?

Though thou be blind as fire or as the sea,
Why should thy waves and storms make war on me?
  Is it for hate thou hast to find me fair,
Or for desire to kiss, if it might be,

My very mouth of song, and kill me there?
So with keen rains vexing his crownless hair.
  With bright feet bruised from no delightful way,
Through darkness and the disenchanted air,

Lost Love went weeping half a winter's day.
And the armèd wind that smote him seemed to say,
  How shall the dew live when the dawn is fled,
Or wherefore should the Mayflower outlast May?

Then Death took Love by the right hand and said,
Smiling: Come now and look upon thy dead.
  But Love cast down the glories of his eyes,
And bowed down like a flower his flowerless head.

And Death spake, saying: What ails thee in such wise,
Being god, to shut thy sight up from the skies?
  If thou canst see not, hast thou ears to hear?
Or is thy soul too as a leaf that dies?

Even as he spake with fleshless lips of fear,
But soft as sleep sings in a tired man's ear,
  Behold, the winter was not, and its might
Fell, and fruits broke forth of the barren year.

And upon earth was largess of great light,
And moving music winged for worldwide flight,
  And shapes and sounds of gods beheld and heard,
And day's foot set upon the neck of night.

And with such song the hollow ways were stirred
As of a god's heart hidden in a bird,
  Or as the whole soul of the sun in spring
Should find full utterance in one flower-soft word,

And all the season should break forth and sing
From one flower's lips, in one rose triumphing;
  Such breath and light of song as of a flame
Made ears and spirits of them that heard it ring.

And Love beholding knew not for the same
The shape that led him, nor in face nor name,
  For he was bright and great of thews and fair,
And in Love's eyes he was not Death, but Fame.

Not that grey ghost whose life is empty and bare
And his limbs moulded out of mortal air,
  A cloud of change that shifts into a shower
And dies and leaves no light for time to wear:

But a god clothed with his own joy and power,
A god re-risen out of his mortal hour
  Immortal, king and lord of time and space,
With eyes that look on them as from a tower.

And where he stood the pale sepulchral place
Bloomed, as new life might in a bloodless face,
  And where men sorrowing came to seek a tomb
With funeral flowers and tears for grief and grace,

They saw with light as of a world in bloom
The portal of the House of Fame illume
  The ways of life wherein we toiling tread,
And watched the darkness as a brand consume.

And through the gates where rule the deathless dead
The sound of a new singer's soul was shed
  That sang among his kinsfolk, and a beam
Shot from the star on a new ruler's head.

A new star lighting the Lethean stream,
A new song mixed into the song supreme
  Made of all souls of singers and their might,
That makes of life and time and death a dream.

Thy star, thy song, O soul that in our sight
Wast as a sun that made for man's delight
  Flowers and all fruits in season, being so near
The sun-god's face, our god that gives us light.

To him of all gods that we love or fear
Thou amongst all men by thy name wast dear,
  Dear to the god that gives us spirit of song
To bind and burn all hearts of men that hear.

The god that makes men's words too sweet and strong
For life or time or death to do them wrong,
  Who sealed with his thy spirit for a sign
And filled it with his breath thy whole life long.

Who made thy moist lips fiery with new wine
Pressed from the grapes of song, the sovereign vine,
  And with all love of all things loveliest
Gave thy soul power to make them more divine.

That thou might'st breathe upon the breathless rest
Of marble, till the brows and lips and breast
  Felt fall from off them as a cancelled curse
That speechless sleep wherewith they lived opprest.

Who gave thee strength and heat of spirit to pierce
All clouds of form and colour that disperse,
  And leave the spirit of beauty to remould
In types of clean chryselephantine verse.

Who gave thee words more golden than fine gold
To carve in shapes more glorious than of old,
  And build thy songs up in the sight of time
As statues set in godhead manifold:

In sight and scorn of temporal change and clime
That meet the sun re-risen with refluent rhyme
  --As god to god might answer face to face--
From lips whereon the morning strikes sublime.

Dear to the god, our god who gave thee place
Among the chosen of days, the royal race,
  The lords of light, whose eyes of old and ears
Saw even on earth and heard him for a space.

There are the souls of those once mortal years
That wrought with fire of joy and light of tears
  In words divine as deeds that grew thereof
Such music as he swoons with love who hears.

There are the lives that lighten from above
Our under lives, the spheral souls that move
  Through the ancient heaven of song-illumined air
Whence we that hear them singing die with love.

There all the crowned Hellenic heads, and there
The old gods who made men godlike as they were,
  The lyric lips wherefrom all songs take fire,
Live eyes, and light of Apollonian hair.

There, round the sovereign passion of that lyre
Which the stars hear and tremble with desire,
  The ninefold light Pierian is made one
That here we see divided, and aspire,

Seeing, after this or that crown to be won;
But where they hear the singing of the sun,
  All form, all sound, all colour, and all thought
Are as one body and soul in unison.

There the song sung shines as a picture wrought,
The painted mouths sing that on earth say nought,
  The carven limbs have sense of blood and growth
And large-eyed life that seeks nor lacks not aught.

There all the music of thy living mouth
Lives, and all loves wrought of thine hand in youth
  And bound about the breasts and brows with gold
And coloured pale or dusk from north or south.

Fair living things made to thy will of old,
Born of thy lips, no births of mortal mould,
  That in the world of song about thee wait
Where thought and truth are one and manifold.

Within the graven lintels of the gate
That here divides our vision and our fate,
  The dreams we walk in and the truths of sleep,
All sense and spirit have life inseparate.

There what one thinks, is his to grasp and keep;
There are no dreams, but very joys to reap,
  No foiled desires that die before delight,
No fears to see across our joys and weep.

There hast thou all thy will of thought and sight,
All hope for harvest, and all heaven for flight;
  The sunrise of whose golden-mouthed glad head
To paler songless ghosts was heat and light.

Here where the sunset of our year is red
Men think of thee as of the summer dead,
  Gone forth before the snows, before thy day,
With unshod feet, with brows unchapleted.

Couldst thou not wait till age had wound, they say,
Round those wreathed brows his soft white blossoms? Nay,
  Why shouldst thou vex thy soul with this harsh air,
Thy bright-winged soul, once free to take its way?

Nor for men's reverence hadst thou need to wear
The holy flower of grey time-hallowed hair;
  Nor were it fit that aught of thee grew old,
Fair lover all thy days of all things fair.

And hear we not thy words of molten gold
Singing? or is their light and heat acold
  Whereat men warmed their spirits? Nay, for all
These yet are with us, ours to hear and hold.

The lovely laughter, the clear tears, the call
Of love to love on ways where shadows fall,
  Through doors of dim division and disguise,
And music made of doubts unmusical;

The love that caught strange light from death's own eyes,[1]
And filled death's lips with fiery words and sighs,
  And half asleep let feed from veins of his
Her close red warm snake's mouth, Egyptian-wise:

And that great night of love more strange than this,[2]
When she that made the whole world's bale and bliss
  Made king of all the world's desire a slave,
And killed him in mid kingdom with a kiss;

Veiled loves that shifted shapes and shafts, and gave,[3]
Laughing, strange gifts to hands that durst not crave,
  Flowers double-blossomed, fruits of scent and hue
Sweet as the bride-bed, stranger than the grave;

All joys and wonders of old lives and new
That ever in love's shine or shadow grew,
  And all the grief whereof he dreams and grieves,
And all sweet roots fed on his light and dew;

All these through thee our spirit of sense perceives,
As threads in the unseen woof thy music weaves,
  Birds caught and snared that fill our ears with thee,
Bay-blossoms in thy wreath of brow-bound leaves.

Mixed with the masque of death's old comedy
Though thou too pass, have here our flowers, that we
  For all the flowers thou gav'st upon thee shed,
And pass not crownless to Persephone.

Blue lotus-blooms and white and rosy-red
We wind with poppies for thy silent head,
  And on this margin of the sundering sea
Leave thy sweet light to rise upon the dead.

[Footnote 1: _La Morte Amoureuse._]

[Footnote 2: _Une Nuit de Cléopâtre._]

[Footnote 3: _Mademoiselle de Maupin._]



SONNET

(WITH A COPY OF _Mademoiselle de Maupin_)


This is the golden book of spirit and sense,
    The holy writ of beauty; he that wrought
    Made it with dreams and faultless words and thought
That seeks and finds and loses in the dense
Dim air of life that beauty's excellence
    Wherewith love makes one hour of life distraught
    And all hours after follow and find not aught.
Here is that height of all love's eminence
Where man may breathe but for a breathing-space
    And feel his soul burn as an altar-fire
    To the unknown God of unachieved desire,
And from the middle mystery of the place
    Watch lights that break, hear sounds as of a quire,
But see not twice unveiled the veiled God's face.



AGE AND SONG

(TO BARRY CORNWALL)


I

In vain men tell us time can alter
Old loves or make old memories falter,
  That with the old year the old year's life closes.
The old dew still falls on the old sweet flowers,
The old sun revives the new-fledged hours,
  The old summer rears the new-born roses.


II

Much more a Muse that bears upon her
Raiment and wreath and flower of honour,
  Gathered long since and long since woven,
Fades not or falls as fall the vernal
Blossoms that bear no fruit eternal,
  By summer or winter charred or cloven.


III

No time casts down, no time upraises,
Such loves, such memories, and such praises,
  As need no grace of sun or shower,
No saving screen from frost or thunder
To tend and house around and under
  The imperishable and fearless flower.


IV

Old thanks, old thoughts, old aspirations,
Outlive men's lives and lives of nations,
  Dead, but for one thing which survives--
The inalienable and unpriced treasure,
The old joy of power, the old pride of pleasure,
  That lives in light above men's lives.



IN MEMORY OF BARRY CORNWALL

(October 4, 1874)


I

In the garden of death, where the singers whose names are deathless
  One with another make music unheard of men,
Where the dead sweet roses fade not of lips long breathless,
  And the fair eyes shine that shall weep not or change again,
Who comes now crowned with the blossom of snow-white years?
What music is this that the world of the dead men hears?


II

Beloved of men, whose words on our lips were honey,
  Whose name in our ears and our fathers' ears was sweet,
Like summer gone forth of the land his songs made sunny,
  To the beautiful veiled bright world where the glad ghosts meet,
Child, father, bridegroom and bride, and anguish and rest,
No soul shall pass of a singer than this more blest.


III

Blest for the years' sweet sake that were filled and brightened,
  As a forest with birds, with the fruit and the flower of his song;
For the souls' sake blest that heard, and their cares were lightened,
  For the hearts' sake blest that have fostered his name so long;
By the living and dead lips blest that have loved his name,
And clothed with their praise and crowned with their love for fame.


IV

Ah, fair and fragrant his fame as flowers that close not,
  That shrink not by day for heat or for cold by night,
As a thought in the heart shall increase when the heart's self knows not,
  Shall endure in our ears as a sound, in our eyes as a light;
Shall wax with the years that wane and the seasons' chime,
As a white rose thornless that grows in the garden of time.


V

The same year calls, and one goes hence with another,
  And men sit sad that were glad for their sweet songs' sake;
The same year beckons, and elder with younger brother
  Takes mutely the cup from his hand that we all shall take.[1]
They pass ere the leaves be past or the snows be come;
And the birds are loud, but the lips that outsang them dumb.


VI

Time takes them home that we loved, fair names and famous,
  To the soft long sleep, to the broad sweet bosom of death;
But the flower of their souls he shall take not away to shame us,
  Nor the lips lack song for ever that now lack breath.
For with us shall the music and perfume that die not dwell,
Though the dead to our dead bid welcome, and we farewell.

[Footnote 1: Sydney Dobell died August 22, 1874.]



EPICEDE

(James Lorimer Graham died at Florence, April 30, 1876)


Life may give for love to death
  Little; what are life's gifts worth
  To the dead wrapt round with earth?
Yet from lips of living breath
  Sighs or words we are fain to give,
  All that yet, while yet we live,
Life may give for love to death.

Dead so long before his day,
  Passed out of the Italian sun
  To the dark where all is done,
Fallen upon the verge of May;
  Here at life's and April's end
  How should song salute my friend
Dead so long before his day?

Not a kindlier life or sweeter
  Time, that lights and quenches men,
  Now may quench or light again,
Mingling with the mystic metre
  Woven of all men's lives with his
  Not a clearer note than this,
Not a kindlier life or sweeter.

In this heavenliest part of earth
  He that living loved the light,
  Light and song, may rest aright,
One in death, if strange in birth,
  With the deathless dead that make
  Life the lovelier for their sake
In this heavenliest part of earth.

Light, and song, and sleep at last--
  Struggling hands and suppliant knees
  Get no goodlier gift than these.
Song that holds remembrance fast,
  Light that lightens death, attend
  Round their graves who have to friend
Light, and song, and sleep at last.



TO VICTOR HUGO


He had no children, who for love of men,
  Being God, endured of Gods such things as thou,
  Father; nor on his thunder-beaten brow
Fell such a woe as bows thine head again,
Twice bowed before, though godlike, in man's ken,
  And seen too high for any stroke to bow
  Save this of some strange God's that bends it now
The third time with such weight as bruised it then.
Fain would grief speak, fain utter for love's sake
Some word; but comfort who might bid thee take?
  What God in your own tongue shall talk with thee,
Showing how all souls that look upon the sun
Shall be for thee one spirit and thy son,
  And thy soul's child the soul of man to be?

_January 3, 1876._



INFERIAE


Spring, and the light and sound of things on earth
Requickening, all within our green sea's girth;
A time of passage or a time of birth
  Fourscore years since as this year, first and last.

The sun is all about the world we see,
The breath and strength of very spring; and we
Live, love, and feed on our own hearts; but he
  Whose heart fed mine has passed into the past.

Past, all things born with sense and blood and breath;
The flesh hears nought that now the spirit saith.
If death be like as birth and birth as death,
  The first was fair--more fair should be the last.

Fourscore years since, and come but one month more
The count were perfect of his mortal score
Whose sail went seaward yesterday from shore
  To cross the last of many an unsailed sea.

Light, love and labour up to life's last height,
These three were stars unsetting in his sight;
Even as the sun is life and heat and light
  And sets not nor is dark when dark are we.

The life, the spirit, and the work were one
That here--ah, who shall say, that here are done?
Not I, that know not; father, not thy son,
  For all the darkness of the night and sea.

_March 5, 1877_



A BIRTH-SONG

(For Olivia Frances Madox Rossetti, born September 20, 1875)


    Out of the dark sweet sleep
    Where no dreams laugh or weep
      Borne through bright gates of birth
    Into the dim sweet light
    Where day still dreams of night
      While heaven takes form on earth,
White rose of spirit and flesh, red lily of love,
    What note of song have we
    Fit for the birds and thee,
Fair nestling couched beneath the mother-dove?

    Nay, in some more divine
    Small speechless song of thine
      Some news too good for words,
    Heart-hushed and smiling, we
    Might hope to have of thee,
      The youngest of God's birds,
If thy sweet sense might mix itself with ours,
    If ours might understand
    The language of thy land,
Ere thine become the tongue of mortal hours:

    Ere thy lips learn too soon
    Their soft first human tune,
      Sweet, but less sweet than now,
    And thy raised eyes to read
    Glad and good things indeed,
      But none so sweet as thou:
Ere thought lift up their flower-soft lids to see
    What life and love on earth
    Bring thee for gifts at birth,
But none so good as thine who hast given us thee:

    Now, ere thy sense forget
    The heaven that fills it yet,
      Now, sleeping or awake,
    If thou couldst tell, or we
    Ask and be heard of thee,
      For love's undying sake,
From thy dumb lips divine and bright mute speech
    Such news might touch our ear
    That then would burn to hear
Too high a message now for man's to reach.

    Ere the gold hair of corn
    Had withered wast thou born,
      To make the good time glad;
    The time that but last year
    Fell colder than a tear
      On hearts and hopes turned sad,
High hopes and hearts requickening in thy dawn,
    Even theirs whose life-springs, child,
    Filled thine with life and smiled,
But then wept blood for half their own withdrawn.[1]

    If death and birth be one,
    And set with rise of sun,
      And truth with dreams divine,
    Some word might come with thee
    From over the still sea
      Deep hid in shade or shine,
Crossed by the crossing sails of death and birth,
    Word of some sweet new thing
    Fit for such lips to bring,
Some word of love, some afterthought of earth.

    If love be strong as death,
    By what so natural breath
      As thine could this be said?
    By what so lovely way
    Could love send word to say
      He lives and is not dead?
Such word alone were fit for only thee,
    If his and thine have met
    Where spirits rise and set,
His whom we see not, thine whom scarce we see:

    His there new-born, as thou
    New-born among us now;
      His, here so fruitful-souled,
    Now veiled and silent here,
    Now dumb as thou last year,
      A ghost of one year old:
If lights that change their sphere in changing meet,
    Some ray might his not give
    To thine who wast to live,
And make thy present with his past life sweet?

    Let dreams that laugh or weep,
    All glad and sad dreams, sleep;
      Truth more than dreams is dear.
    Let thoughts that change and fly,
    Sweet thoughts and swift, go by;
      More than all thought is here.
More than all hope can forge or memory feign
    The life that in our eyes,
    Made out of love's life, lies,
And flower-like fed with love for sun and rain.

    Twice royal in its root
    The sweet small olive-shoot
      Here set in sacred earth;
    Twice dowered with glorious grace
    From either heaven-born race
      First blended in its birth;
Fair God or Genius of so fair an hour,
    For love of either name
    Twice crowned, with love and fame,
Guard and be gracious to the fair-named flower.

_October 19, 1875._

[Footnote 1: Oliver Madox Brown died November 5, 1874, in his
twentieth year.]




EX-VOTO


When their last hour shall rise
Pale on these mortal eyes,
Herself like one that dies,
  And kiss me dying
The cold last kiss, and fold
Close round my limbs her cold
Soft shade as raiment rolled
  And leave them lying,

If aught my soul would say
Might move to hear me pray
The birth-god of my day
  That he might hearken,
This grace my heart should crave,
To find no landward grave
That worldly springs make brave,
  World's winters darken,

Nor grow through gradual hours
The cold blind seed of flowers
Made by new beams and showers
  From limbs that moulder,
Nor take my part with earth,
But find for death's new birth
A bed of larger girth,
  More chaste and colder.

Not earth's for spring and fall,
Not earth's at heart, not all
Earth's making, though men call
  Earth only mother,
Not hers at heart she bare
Me, but thy child, O fair
Sea, and thy brother's care,
  The wind thy brother.

Yours was I born, and ye,
The sea-wind and the sea,
Made all my soul in me
  A song for ever,
A harp to string and smite
For love's sake of the bright
Wind and the sea's delight,
  To fail them never:

Not while on this side death
I hear what either saith
And drink of either's breath
  With heart's thanksgiving
That in my veins like wine
Some sharp salt blood of thine,
Some springtide pulse of brine,
  Yet leaps up living.

When thy salt lips wellnigh
Sucked in my mouth's last sigh,
Grudged I so much to die
  This death as others?
Was it no ease to think
The chalice from whose brink
Fate gave me death to drink
  Was thine--my mother's?

Thee too, the all-fostering earth,
Fair as thy fairest birth,
More than thy worthiest worth,
  We call, we know thee,
More sweet and just and dread
Than live men highest of head
Or even thy holiest dead
  Laid low below thee.

The sunbeam on the sheaf,
The dewfall on the leaf,
All joy, all grace, all grief,
  Are thine for giving;
Of thee our loves are born,
Our lives and loves, that mourn
And triumph; tares with corn,
  Dead seed with living:

All good and ill things done
In eyeshot of the sun
At last in thee made one
  Rest well contented;
All words of all man's breath
And works he doth or saith,
All wholly done to death,
  None long lamented.

A slave to sons of thee,
Thou, seeming, yet art free;
But who shall make the sea
  Serve even in seeming?
What plough shall bid it bear
Seed to the sun and the air,
Fruit for thy strong sons' fare,
  Fresh wine's foam streaming?

What oldworld son of thine,
Made drunk with death as wine,
Hath drunk the bright sea's brine
  With lips of laughter?
Thy blood they drink; but he
Who hath drunken of the sea
Once deeplier than of thee
  Shall drink not after.

Of thee thy sons of men
Drink deep, and thirst again;
For wine in feasts, and then
  In fields for slaughter;
But thirst shall touch not him
Who hath felt with sense grown dim
Rise, covering lip and limb,
  The wan sea's water.

All fire of thirst that aches
The salt sea cools and slakes
More than all springs or lakes,
  Freshets or shallows;
Wells where no beam can burn
Through frondage of the fern
That hides from hart and hern
  The haunt it hallows.

Peace with all graves on earth
For death or sleep or birth
Be alway, one in worth
  One with another;
But when my time shall be,
O mother, O my sea,
Alive or dead, take me,
  Me too, my mother.



A BALLAD OF DREAMLAND


I hid my heart in a nest of roses,
  Out of the sun's way, hidden apart;
In a softer bed than the soft white snow's is,
  Under the roses I hid my heart.
  Why would it sleep not? why should it start,
When never a leaf of the rose-tree stirred?
  What made sleep flutter his wings and part?
Only the song of a secret bird.

Lie still, I said, for the wind's wing closes,
  And mild leaves muffle the keen sun's dart;
Lie still, for the wind on the warm sea dozes,
  And the wind is unquieter yet than thou art.
  Does a thought in thee still as a thorn's wound smart?
Does the fang still fret thee of hope deferred?
  What bids the lids of thy sleep dispart?
Only the song of a secret bird.

The green land's name that a charm encloses,
  It never was writ in the traveller's chart,
And sweet on its trees as the fruit that grows is,
  It never was sold in the merchant's mart.
  The swallows of dreams through its dim fields dart,
And sleep's are the tunes in its tree-tops heard;
  No hound's note wakens the wildwood hart,
Only the song of a secret bird.


ENVOI

In the world of dreams I have chosen my part,
  To sleep for a season and hear no word
Of true love's truth or of light love's art,
  Only the song of a secret bird.



CYRIL TOURNEUR


A sea that heaves with horror of the night,
    As maddened by the moon that hangs aghast
    With strain and torment of the ravening blast,
Haggard as hell, a bleak blind bloody light;
No shore but one red reef of rock in sight,
    Whereon the waifs of many a wreck were cast
    And shattered in the fierce nights overpast
Wherein more souls toward hell than heaven took flight;
And 'twixt the shark-toothed rocks and swallowing shoals
A cry as out of hell from all these souls
    Sent through the sheer gorge of the slaughtering sea,
Whose thousand throats, full-fed with life by death,
Fill the black air with foam and furious breath;
  And over all these one star--Chastity.



A BALLAD OF FRANÇOIS VILLON

PRINCE OF ALL BALLAD-MAKERS


Bird of the bitter bright grey golden morn
  Scarce risen upon the dusk of dolorous years,
First of us all and sweetest singer born
  Whose far shrill note the world of new men hears
  Cleave the cold shuddering shade as twilight clears;
When song new-born put off the old world's attire
And felt its tune on her changed lips expire,
  Writ foremost on the roll of them that came
Fresh girt for service of the latter lyre,
  Villon, our sad bad glad mad brother's name!

Alas the joy, the sorrow, and the scorn,
  That clothed thy life with hopes and sins and fears,
And gave thee stones for bread and tares for corn
  And plume-plucked gaol-birds for thy starveling peers
  Till death clipt close their flight with shameful shears;
Till shifts came short and loves were hard to hire,
When lilt of song nor twitch of twangling wire
  Could buy thee bread or kisses; when light fame
Spurned like a ball and haled through brake and briar,
  Villon, our sad bad glad mad brother's name!

Poor splendid wings so frayed and soiled and torn!
  Poor kind wild eyes so dashed with light quick tears!
Poor perfect voice, most blithe when most forlorn,
  That rings athwart the sea whence no man steers
  Like joy-bells crossed with death-bells in our ears!
What far delight has cooled the fierce desire
That like some ravenous bird was strong to tire
  On that frail flesh and soul consumed with flame,
But left more sweet than roses to respire,
  Villon, our sad bad glad mad brother's name?


ENVOI

Prince of sweet songs made out of tears and fire,
A harlot was thy nurse, a God thy sire;
  Shame soiled thy song, and song assoiled thy shame.
But from thy feet now death has washed the mire,
Love reads out first at head of all our quire,
  Villon, our sad bad glad mad brother's name.



PASTICHE


Now the days are all gone over
Of our singing, love by lover,
Days of summer-coloured seas
Blown adrift through beam and breeze.

Now the nights are all past over
Of our dreaming, dreams that hover
In a mist of fair false things,
Nights afloat on wide wan wings.

Now the loves with faith for mother,
Now the fears with hope for brother,
Scarce are with us as strange words,
Notes from songs of last year's birds.

Now all good that comes or goes is
As the smell of last year's roses,
As the radiance in our eyes
Shot from summer's ere he dies.

Now the morning faintlier risen
Seems no God come forth of prison,
But a bird of plume-plucked wing,
Pale with thoughts of evening.

Now hath hope, outraced in running,
Given the torch up of his cunning
And the palm he thought to wear
Even to his own strong child--despair.



BEFORE SUNSET


In the lower lands of day
  On the hither side of night,
There is nothing that will stay,
  There are all things soft to sight;
  Lighted shade and shadowy light
In the wayside and the way,
  Hours the sun has spared to smite,
Flowers the rain has left to play.

Shall these hours run down and say
  No good thing of thee and me?
Time that made us and will slay
  Laughs at love in me and thee;
  But if here the flowers may see
One whole hour of amorous breath,
  Time shall die, and love shall be
Lord as time was over death.



SONG


Love laid his sleepless head
On a thorny rosy bed;
And his eyes with tears were red,
And pale his lips as the dead.

And fear and sorrow and scorn
Kept watch by his head forlorn,
Till the night was overworn
And the world was merry with morn.

And Joy came up with the day
And kissed Love's lips as he lay,
And the watchers ghostly and grey
Sped from his pillow away.

And his eyes as the dawn grew bright,
And his lips waxed ruddy as light:
Sorrow may reign for a night,
But day shall bring back delight.



A VISION OF SPRING IN WINTER


I

O tender time that love thinks long to see,
  Sweet foot of spring that with her footfall sows
  Late snowlike flowery leavings of the snows,
Be not too long irresolute to be;
O mother-month, where have they hidden thee?
  Out of the pale time of the flowerless rose
I reach my heart out toward the springtime lands,
  I stretch my spirit forth to the fair hours,
      The purplest of the prime;
I lean my soul down over them, with hands
  Made wide to take the ghostly growths of flowers;
      I send my love back to the lovely time.


II

Where has the greenwood hid thy gracious head?
  Veiled with what visions while the grey world grieves,
  Or muffled with what shadows of green leaves,
What warm intangible green shadows spread
To sweeten the sweet twilight for thy bed?
  What sleep enchants thee? what delight deceives?
Where the deep dreamlike dew before the dawn
  Feels not the fingers of the sunlight yet
      Its silver web unweave,
Thy footless ghost on some unfooted lawn
  Whose air the unrisen sunbeams fear to fret
      Lives a ghost's life of daylong dawn and eve.


III

Sunrise it sees not, neither set of star,
  Large nightfall, nor imperial plenilune,
  Nor strong sweet shape of the full-breasted noon;
But where the silver-sandalled shadows are,
Too soft for arrows of the sun to mar,
  Moves with the mild gait of an ungrown moon:
Hard overhead the half-lit crescent swims,
  The tender-coloured night draws hardly breath,
      The light is listening;
They watch the dawn of slender-shapen limbs,
  Virginal, born again of doubtful death,
      Chill foster-father of the weanling spring.


IV

As sweet desire of day before the day,
  As dreams of love before the true love born,
  From the outer edge of winter overworn
The ghost arisen of May before the May
Takes through dim air her unawakened way,
  The gracious ghost of morning risen ere morn.
With little unblown breasts and child-eyed looks
  Following, the very maid, the girl-child spring,
      Lifts windward her bright brows,
Dips her light feet in warm and moving brooks,
  And kindles with her own mouth's colouring
      The fearful firstlings of the plumeless boughs.


V

I seek thee sleeping, and awhile I see,
  Fair face that art not, how thy maiden breath
  Shall put at last the deadly days to death
And fill the fields and fire the woods with thee
And seaward hollows where my feet would be
  When heaven shall hear the word that April saith
To change the cold heart of the weary time,
  To stir and soften all the time to tears,
      Tears joyfuller than mirth;
As even to May's clear height the young days climb
  With feet not swifter than those fair first years
      Whose flowers revive not with thy flowers on earth.


VI

I would not bid thee, though I might, give back
  One good thing youth has given and borne away;
I crave not any comfort of the day
That is not, nor on time's retrodden track
Would turn to meet the white-robed hours or black
  That long since left me on their mortal way;
Nor light nor love that has been, nor the breath
  That comes with morning from the sun to be
      And sets light hope on fire;
No fruit, no flower thought once too fair for death,
  No flower nor hour once fallen from life's green tree,
      No leaf once plucked or once fulfilled desire.


VII

The morning song beneath the stars that fled
  With twilight through the moonless mountain air,
  While youth with burning lips and wreathless hair
Sang toward the sun that was to crown his head,
Rising; the hopes that triumphed and fell dead,
  The sweet swift eyes and songs of hours that were;
These may'st thou not give back for ever; these,
  As at the sea's heart all her wrecks lie waste,
      Lie deeper than the sea;
But flowers thou may'st, and winds, and hours of ease,
  And all its April to the world thou may'st
      Give back, and half my April back to me.



CHORIAMBICS


Love, what ailed thee to leave life that was made
    lovely, we thought, with love?
What sweet visions of sleep lured thee away, down
    from the light above?

What strange faces of dreams, voices that called,
    hands that were raised to wave,
Lured or led thee, alas, out of the sun, down to the
    sunless grave?

Ah, thy luminous eyes! once was their light fed with
    the fire of day;
Now their shadowy lids cover them close, hush them
    and hide away.

Ah, thy snow-coloured hands! once were they chains,
    mighty to bind me fast;
Now no blood in them burns, mindless of love, senseless
    of passion past.

Ah, thy beautiful hair! so was it once braided for
    me, for me;
Now for death is it crowned, only for death, lover
    and lord of thee.

Sweet, the kisses of death set on thy lips, colder are
    they than mine;
Colder surely than past kisses that love poured for
    thy lips as wine.

Lov'st thou death? is his face fairer than love's,
    brighter to look upon?
Seest thou light in his eyes, light by which love's
    pales and is overshone?

Lo the roses of death, grey as the dust, chiller of leaf
    than snow!
Why let fall from thy hand love's that were thine,
    roses that loved thee so?

Large red lilies of love, sceptral and tall, lovely for
    eyes to see;
Thornless blossom of love, full of the sun, fruits that
    were reared for thee.

Now death's poppies alone circle thy hair, girdle thy
    breasts as white;
Bloodless blossoms of death, leaves that have sprung
    never against the light.

Nay then, sleep if thou wilt; love is content; what
    should he do to weep?
Sweet was love to thee once; now in thine eyes
    sweeter than love is sleep.



AT PARTING


For a day and a night Love sang to us, played with us,
  Folded us round from the dark and the light;
And our hearts were fulfilled of the music he made with us,
Made with our hearts and our lips while he stayed with us,
  Stayed in mid passage his pinions from flight
        For a day and a night.

From his foes that kept watch with his wings had he hidden us,
  Covered us close from the eyes that would smite,
From the feet that had tracked and the tongues that had chidden us
Sheltering in shade of the myrtles forbidden us
  Spirit and flesh growing one with delight
        For a day and a night.

But his wings will not rest and his feet will not stay for us:
  Morning is here in the joy of its might;
With his breath has he sweetened a night and a day for us;
Now let him pass, and the myrtles make way for us;
  Love can but last in us here at his height
        For a day and a night.



A SONG IN SEASON


I

        Thou whose beauty
        Knows no duty
Due to love that moves thee never;
        Thou whose mercies
        Are men's curses,
And thy smile a scourge for ever;


II

        Thou that givest
        Death and livest
On the death of thy sweet giving;
        Thou that sparest
        Not nor carest
Though thy scorn leave no love living;


III

        Thou whose rootless
        Flower is fruitless
As the pride its heart encloses,
        But thine eyes are
        As May skies are,
And thy words like spoken roses;


IV

        Thou whose grace is
        In men's faces
Fierce and wayward as thy will is;
        Thou whose peerless
        Eyes are tearless,
And thy thoughts as cold sweet lilies;


V

        Thou that takest
        Hearts and makest
Wrecks of loves to strew behind thee,
        Whom the swallow
        Sure should follow,
Finding summer where we find thee;


VI

        Thou that wakest
        Hearts and breakest,
And thy broken hearts forgive thee,
        That wilt make no
        Pause and take no
Gift that love for love might give thee;


VII

        Thou that bindest
        Eyes and blindest,
Serving worst who served thee longest;
        Thou that speakest,
        And the weakest
Heart is his that was the strongest;


VIII

        Take in season
        Thought with reason;
Think what gifts are ours for giving;
        Hear what beauty
        Owes of duty
To the love that keeps it living.


IX

        Dust that covers
        Long dead lovers
Song blows off with breath that brightens;
        At its flashes
        Their white ashes
Burst in bloom that lives and lightens.


X

        Had they bent not
        Head or lent not
Ear to love and amorous duties,
        Song had never
        Saved for ever,
Love, the least of all their beauties.


XI

        All the golden
        Names of olden
Women yet by men's love cherished,
        All our dearest
        Thoughts hold nearest,
Had they loved not, all had perished.


XII

        If no fruit is
        Of thy beauties,
Tell me yet, since none may win them,
        What and wherefore
        Love should care for
Of all good things hidden in them?


XIII

        Pain for profit
        Comes but of it,
If the lips that lure their lover's
        Hold no treasure
        Past the measure
Of the lightest hour that hovers.


XIV

        If they give not
        Or forgive not
Gifts or thefts for grace or guerdon,
        Love that misses
        Fruit of kisses
Long will bear no thankless burden.


XV

        If they care not
        Though love were not,
If no breath of his burn through them,
        Joy must borrow
        Song from sorrow,
Fear teach hope the way to woo them.


XVI

        Grief has measures
        Soft as pleasure's,
Fear has moods that hope lies deep in,
        Songs to sing him,
        Dreams to bring him,
And a red-rose bed to sleep in.


XVII

        Hope with fearless
        Looks and tearless
Lies and laughs too near the thunder;
        Fear hath sweeter
        Speech and meeter
For heart's love to hide him under.


XVIII

        Joy by daytime
        Fills his playtime
Full of songs loud mirth takes pride in;
        Night and morrow
        Weave round sorrow
Thoughts as soft as sleep to hide in.


XIX

        Graceless faces,
        Loveless graces,
Are but motes in light that quicken,
        Sands that run down
        Ere the sundown,
Roseleaves dead ere autumn sicken.


XX

        Fair and fruitless
        Charms are bootless
Spells to ward off age's peril;
        Lips that give not
        Love shall live not,
Eyes that meet not eyes are sterile.


XXI

        But the beauty
        Bound in duty
Fast to love that falls off never
        Love shall cherish
        Lest it perish,
And its root bears fruit for ever.



TWO LEADERS

[Greek:
Bate domon, megaloi philotimoi
Nuktos paides apaides, hup euphroni pompa.]


I

O great and wise, clear-souled and high of heart,
  One the last flower of Catholic love, that grows
  Amid bare thorns their only thornless rose,
From the fierce juggling of the priests' loud mart
Yet alien, yet unspotted and apart
  From the blind hard foul rout whose shameless shows
  Mock the sweet heaven whose secret no man knows
With prayers and curses and the soothsayer's art;
One like a storm-god of the northern foam
  Strong, wrought of rock that breasts and breaks the sea
    And thunders back its thunder, rhyme for rhyme
    Answering, as though to outroar the tides of time
  And bid the world's wave back--what song should be
Theirs that with praise would bring and sing you home?


II

With all our hearts we praise you whom ye hate,
  High souls that hate us; for our hopes are higher,
  And higher than yours the goal of our desire,
Though high your ends be as your hearts are great.
Your world of Gods and kings, of shrine and state,
  Was of the night when hope and fear stood nigher,
  Wherein men walked by light of stars and fire
Till man by day stood equal with his fate.
Honour not hate we give you, love not fear,
  Last prophets of past kind, who fill the dome
Of great dead Gods with wrath and wail, nor hear
  Time's word and man's: "Go honoured hence, go home,
Night's childless children; here your hour is done;
Pass with the stars, and leave us with the sun."



VICTOR HUGO IN 1877

"Dazzle mine eyes, or do I see three suns?"


Above the spring-tide sundawn of the year,
    A sunlike star, not born of day or night,
    Filled the fair heaven of spring with heavenlier light,
Made of all ages orbed in one sole sphere
Whose light was as a Titan's smile or tear;
    Then rose a ray more flowerlike, starry white,
    Like a child's eye grown lovelier with delight,
Sweet as a child's heart-lightening laugh to hear;
And last a fire from heaven, a fiery rain
    As of God's wrath on the unclean cities, fell
    And lit the shuddering shades of half-seen hell
That shrank before it and were cloven in twain;
    A beacon fired by lightning, whence all time
    Sees red the bare black ruins of a crime.



CHILD'S SONG


What is gold worth, say,
Worth for work or play,
Worth to keep or pay,
Hide or throw away,
    Hope about or fear?
What is love worth, pray?
    Worth a tear?

Golden on the mould
Lie the dead leaves rolled
Of the wet woods old,
Yellow leaves and cold,
    Woods without a dove;
Gold is worth but gold;
    Love's worth love.



TRIADS


I


    I

    The word of the sun to the sky,
      The word of the wind to the sea,
        The word of the moon to the night,
                        What may it be?


    II

    The sense to the flower of the fly,
      The sense of the bird to the tree,
        The sense to the cloud of the light,
                        Who can tell me?


    III

    The song of the fields to the kye,
      The song of the lime to the bee,
        The song of the depth to the height,
                        Who knows all three?


II


    I

    The message of April to May
      That May sends on into June
        And June gives out to July
                        For birthday boon;


    II


    The delight of the dawn in the day,
      The delight of the day in the noon,
        The delight of a song in a sigh
                        That breaks the tune;


    III

    The secret of passing away,
      The cost of the change of the moon,
        None knows it with ear or with eye,
                        But all will soon.


III


    I

    The live wave's love for the shore,
      The shore's for the wave as it dies,
        The love of the thunder-fire
                        That sears the skies,


    II

    We shall know not though life wax hoar,
      Till all life, spent into sighs,
        Burn out as consumed with desire
                        Of death's strange eyes;


    III

    Till the secret be secret no more
      In the light of one hour as it flies,
        Be the hour as of suns that expire
                        Or suns that rise.



FOUR SONGS OF FOUR SEASONS


I. WINTER IN NORTHUMBERLAND

  I

      Outside the garden
      The wet skies harden;
      The gates are barred on
        The summer side:
      "Shut out the flower-time,
      Sunbeam and shower-time;
      Make way for our time,"
        Wild winds have cried.
      Green once and cheery,
      The woods, worn weary,
      Sigh as the dreary
        Weak sun goes home:
      A great wind grapples
      The wave, and dapples
  The dead green floor of the sea with foam.


  II

      Through fell and moorland,
      And salt-sea foreland,
      Our noisy norland
        Resounds and rings;
      Waste waves thereunder
      Are blown in sunder,
      And winds make thunder
        With cloudwide wings;
      Sea-drift makes dimmer
      The beacon's glimmer;
      Nor sail nor swimmer
        Can try the tides;
      And snowdrifts thicken
      Where, when leaves quicken,
  Under the heather the sundew hides.


 III

      Green land and red land,
      Moorside and headland,
      Are white as dead land,
        Are all as one;
      Nor honied heather,
      Nor bells to gather,
      Fair with fair weather
        And faithful sun:
      Fierce frost has eaten
      All flowers that sweeten
      The fells rain-beaten;
        And winds their foes
      Have made the snow's bed
      Down in the rose-bed;
  Deep in the snow's bed bury the rose.


  IV

      Bury her deeper
      Than any sleeper;
      Sweet dreams will keep her
        All day, all night;
      Though sleep benumb her
      And time o'ercome her,
      She dreams of summer,
        And takes delight,
      Dreaming and sleeping
      In love's good keeping,
      While rain is weeping
        And no leaves cling;
      Winds will come bringing her
      Comfort, and singing her
  Stories and songs and good news of the spring.


  V

      Draw the white curtain
      Close, and be certain
      She takes no hurt in
        Her soft low bed;
      She feels no colder,
      And grows not older,
      Though snows enfold her
        From foot to head;
      She turns not chilly
      Like weed and lily
      In marsh or hilly
        High watershed,
      Or green soft island
      In lakes of highland;
  She sleeps awhile, and she is not dead.


  VI

      For all the hours,
      Come sun, come showers,
      Are friends of flowers,
        And fairies all;
      When frost entrapped her,
      They came and lapped her
      In leaves, and wrapped her
        With shroud and pall;
      In red leaves wound her,
      With dead leaves bound her
      Dead brows, and round her
        A death-knell rang;
      Rang the death-bell for her,
      Sang, "is it well for her,
  Well, is it well with you, rose?" they sang.


  VII

      O what and where is
      The rose now, fairies,
      So shrill the air is,
        So wild the sky?
      Poor last of roses,
      Her worst of woes is
      The noise she knows is
        The winter's cry;
      His hunting hollo
      Has scared the swallow;
      Fain would she follow
        And fain would fly:
      But wind unsettles
      Her poor last petals;
  Had she but wings, and she would not die.


  VIII

      Come, as you love her,
      Come close and cover
      Her white face over,
        And forth again
      Ere sunset glances
      On foam that dances,
      Through lowering lances
        Of bright white rain;
      And make your playtime
      Of winter's daytime,
      As if the Maytime
        Were here to sing;
      As if the snowballs
      Were soft like blowballs,
  Blown in a mist from the stalk in the spring.


  IX

      Each reed that grows in
      Our stream is frozen,
      The fields it flows in
        Are hard and black;
      The water-fairy
      Waits wise and wary
      Till time shall vary
        And thaws come back.
      "O sister, water,"
      The wind besought her,
      "O twin-born daughter
        Of spring with me,
      Stay with me, play with me,
      Take the warm way with me,
  Straight for the summer and oversea."


  X

      But winds will vary,
      And wise and wary
      The patient fairy
        Of water waits;
      All shrunk and wizen,
      In iron prison,
      Till spring re-risen
        Unbar the gates;
      Till, as with clamour
      Of axe and hammer,
      Chained streams that stammer
        And struggle in straits
      Burst bonds that shiver,
      And thaws deliver
  The roaring river in stormy spates.


  XI

      In fierce March weather
      White waves break tether,
      And whirled together
        At either hand,
      Like weeds uplifted,
      The tree-trunks rifted
      In spars are drifted,
        Like foam or sand,
      Past swamp and sallow
      And reed-beds callow,
      Through pool and shallow,
        To wind and lee,
      Till, no more tongue-tied,
      Full flood and young tide
  Roar down the rapids and storm the sea.


  XII

      As men's cheeks faded
      On shores invaded,
      When shorewards waded
        The lords of fight;
      When churl and craven
      Saw hard on haven
      The wide-winged raven
        At mainmast height;
      When monks affrighted
      To windward sighted
      The birds full-flighted
        Of swift sea-kings;
      So earth turns paler
      When Storm the sailor
  Steers in with a roar in the race of his wings.


  XIII

      O strong sea-sailor,
      Whose cheek turns paler
      For wind or hail or
        For fear of thee?
      O far sea-farer,
      O thunder-bearer,
      Thy songs are rarer
        Than soft songs be.
      O fleet-foot stranger,
      O north-sea ranger
      Through days of danger
        And ways of fear,
      Blow thy horn here for us,
      Blow the sky clear for us,
  Send us the song of the sea to hear.


  XIV

      Roll the strong stream of it
      Up, till the scream of it
      Wake from a dream of it
        Children that sleep,
      Seamen that fare for them
      Forth, with a prayer for them;
      Shall not God care for them,
        Angels not keep?
      Spare not the surges
      Thy stormy scourges;
      Spare us the dirges
        Of wives that weep.
      Turn back the waves for us:
      Dig no fresh graves for us,
  Wind, in the manifold gulfs of the deep.


  XV

      O stout north-easter,
      Sea-king, land-waster,
      For all thine haste, or
        Thy stormy skill,
      Yet hadst thou never,
      For all endeavour,
      Strength to dissever
        Or strength to spill,
      Save of his giving
      Who gave our living,
      Whose hands are weaving
        What ours fulfil;
      Whose feet tread under
      The storms and thunder;
  Who made our wonder to work his will.


  XVI

      His years and hours,
      His world's blind powers,
      His stars and flowers,
        His nights and days,
      Sea-tide and river,
      And waves that shiver,
      Praise God, the giver
        Of tongues to praise.
      Winds in their blowing,
      And fruits in growing;
      Time in its going,
        While time shall be;
      In death and living,
      With one thanksgiving,
  Praise him whose hand is the strength of the sea.



II. SPRING IN TUSCANY

Rose-red lilies that bloom on the banner;
  Rose-cheeked gardens that revel in spring;
      Rose-mouthed acacias that laugh as they climb,
Like plumes for a queen's hand fashioned to fan her
  With wind more soft than a wild dove's wing,
       What do they sing in the spring of their time?

If this be the rose that the world hears singing,
  Soft in the soft night, loud in the day,
       Songs for the fire-flies to dance as they hear;
If that be the song of the nightingale, springing
  Forth in the form of a rose in May,
       What do they say of the way of the year?

What of the way of the world gone Maying,
  What of the work of the buds in the bowers,
       What of the will of the wind on the wall,
Fluttering the wall-flowers, sighing and playing,
  Shrinking again as a bird that cowers,
       Thinking of hours when the flowers have to fall?

Out of the throats of the loud birds showering,
  Out of the folds where the flag-lilies leap,
       Out of the mouths of the roses stirred,
Out of the herbs on the walls reflowering,
  Out of the heights where the sheer snows sleep,
       Out of the deep and the steep, one word.

One from the lips of the lily-flames leaping,
  The glad red lilies that burn in our sight,
       The great live lilies for standard and crown;
One from the steeps where the pines stand sleeping,
  One from the deep land, one from the height,
       One from the light and the might of the town.

The lowlands laugh with delight of the highlands,
  Whence May winds feed them with balm and breath
       From hills that beheld in the years behind
A shape as of one from the blest souls' islands,
  Made fair by a soul too fair for death,
       With eyes on the light that should smite them blind.

Vallombrosa remotely remembers,
  Perchance, what still to us seems so near
       That time not darkens it, change not mars,
The foot that she knew when her leaves were September's,
  The face lift up to the star-blind seer,
       That saw from his prison arisen his stars.

And Pisa broods on her dead, not mourning,
  For love of her loveliness given them in fee;
       And Prato gleams with the glad monk's gift
Whose hand was there as the hand of morning;
  And Siena, set in the sand's red sea,
       Lifts loftier her head than the red sand's drift.

And far to the fair south-westward lightens,
  Girdled and sandalled and plumed with flowers,
       At sunset over the love-lit lands,
The hill-side's crown where the wild hill brightens,
  Saint Fina's town of the Beautiful Towers,
       Hailing the sun with a hundred hands.

Land of us all that have loved thee dearliest,
  Mother of men that were lords of man,
       Whose name in the world's heart works as a spell,
My last song's light, and the star of mine earliest,
  As we turn from thee, sweet, who wast ours for a span,
       Fare well we may not who say farewell.


III. SUMMER IN AUVERGNE

The sundawn fills the land
Full as a feaster's hand
Fills full with bloom of bland
       Bright wine his cup;
Flows full to flood that fills
From the arch of air it thrills
Those rust-red iron hills
       With morning up.

Dawn, as a panther springs,
With fierce and fire-fledged wings
Leaps on the land that rings
       From her bright feet
Through all its lava-black
Cones that cast answer back
And cliffs of footless track
       Where thunders meet.

The light speaks wide and loud
From deeps blown clean of cloud
As though day's heart were proud
       And heaven's were glad;
The towers brown-striped and grey
Take fire from heaven of day
As though the prayers they pray
       Their answers had.

Higher in these high first hours
Wax all the keen church towers,
And higher all hearts of ours
       Than the old hills' crown,
Higher than the pillared height
Of that strange cliff-side bright
With basalt towers whose might
       Strong time bows down.

And the old fierce ruin there
Of the old wild princes' lair
Whose blood in mine hath share
       Gapes gaunt and great
Toward heaven that long ago
Watched all the wan land's woe
Whereon the wind would blow
       Of their bleak hate.

Dead are those deeds; but yet
Their memory seems to fret
Lands that might else forget
       That old world's brand;
Dead all their sins and days;
Yet in this red clime's rays
Some fiery memory stays
       That sears their land.


IV. AUTUMN IN CORNWALL

The year lies fallen and faded
On cliffs by clouds invaded,
With tongues of storms upbraided,
       With wrath of waves bedinned;
And inland, wild with warning,
As in deaf ears or scorning,
The clarion even and morning
       Rings of the south-west wind.

The wild bents wane and wither
In blasts whose breath bows hither
Their grey-grown heads and thither,
       Unblest of rain or sun;
The pale fierce heavens are crowded
With shapes like dreams beclouded,
As though the old year enshrouded
       Lay, long ere life were done.

Full-charged with oldworld wonders,
From dusk Tintagel thunders
A note that smites and sunders
       The hard frore fields of air;
A trumpet stormier-sounded
Than once from lists rebounded
When strong men sense-confounded
       Fell thick in tourney there.

From scarce a duskier dwelling
Such notes of wail rose welling
Through the outer darkness, telling
       In the awful singer's ears
What souls the darkness covers,
What love-lost souls of lovers,
Whose cry still hangs and hovers
       In each man's born that hears.

For there by Hector's brother
And yet some thousand other
He that had grief to mother
       Passed pale from Dante's sight;
With one fast linked as fearless,
Perchance, there only tearless;
Iseult and Tristram, peerless
       And perfect queen and knight.

A shrill-winged sound comes flying
North, as of wild souls crying
The cry of things undying,
       That know what life must be;
Or as the old year's heart, stricken
Too sore for hope to quicken
By thoughts like thorns that thicken,
       Broke, breaking with the sea.



THE WHITE CZAR

[In an English magazine of 1877 there appeared a version of some insolent
lines addressed by "A Russian Poet to the Empress of India." To these the
first of the two following sonnets was designed to serve by way of
counterblast. The writer will scarcely be suspected of royalism or
imperialism; but it seemed to him that an insult levelled by Muscovite lips
at the ruler of England might perhaps be less unfitly than unofficially
resented by an Englishman who was also a republican.]


I

Gehazi by the hue that chills thy cheek
  And Pilate by the hue that sears thine hand
  Whence all earth's waters cannot wash the brand
That signs thy soul a manslayer's though thou speak
All Christ, with lips most murderous and most meek--
  Thou set thy foot where England's used to stand!
  Thou reach thy rod forth over Indian land!
Slave of the slaves that call thee lord, and weak
As their foul tongues who praise thee! son of them
Whose presence put the snows and stars to shame
  In centuries dead and damned that reek below
Curse-consecrated, crowned with crime and flame,
  To them that bare thee like them shalt thou go
  Forth of man's life--a leper white as snow.


II

Call for clear water, wash thine hands, be clean,
  Cry, _What is truth?_ O Pilate; thou shalt know
  Haply too soon, and gnash thy teeth for woe
Ere the outer darkness take thee round unseen
That hides the red ghosts of thy race obscene
  Bound nine times round with hell's most dolorous flow,
  And in its pools thy crownless head lie low
By his of Spain who dared an English queen
With half a world to hearten him for fight,
Till the wind gave his warriors and their might
  To shipwreck and the corpse-encumbered sea.
But thou, take heed, ere yet thy lips wax white,
  Lest as it was with Philip so it be,
  O white of name and red of hand, with thee.



RIZPAH


How many sons, how many generations,
  For how long years hast thou bewept, and known
  Nor end of torment nor surcease of moan,
Rachel or Rizpah, wofullest of nations,
Crowned with the crowning sign of desolations,
  And couldst not even scare off with hand or groan
  Those carrion birds devouring bone by bone
The children of thy thousand tribulations?
Thou wast our warrior once; thy sons long dead
Against a foe less foul than this made head,
  Poland, in years that sound and shine afar;
Ere the east beheld in thy bright sword-blade's stead
  The rotten corpse-light of the Russian star
  That lights towards hell his bondslaves and their Czar.



TO LOUIS KOSSUTH

1877


Light of our fathers' eyes, and in our own
  Star of the unsetting sunset! for thy name,
  That on the front of noon was as a flame
In the great year nigh thirty years agone
When all the heavens of Europe shook and shone
  With stormy wind and lightning, keeps its fame
  And bears its witness all day through the same;
Not for past days and great deeds past alone,
Kossuth, we praise thee as our Landor praised,
But that now too we know thy voice upraised,
Thy voice, the trumpet of the truth of God,
  Thine hand, the thunder-bearer's, raised to smite
As with heaven's lightning for a sword and rod
  Men's heads abased before the Muscovite.



TRANSLATIONS FROM THE FRENCH OF VILLON


THE COMPLAINT OF THE FAIR ARMOURESS

I

Meseemeth I heard cry and groan
  That sweet who was the armourer's maid;
For her young years she made sore moan,
  And right upon this wise she said;
  "Ah fierce old age with foul bald head,
To spoil fair things thou art over fain;
  Who holdeth me? who? would God I were dead!
Would God I were well dead and slain!


II

"Lo, thou hast broken the sweet yoke
  That my high beauty held above
All priests and clerks and merchant-folk;
  There was not one but for my love
  Would give me gold and gold enough,
Though sorrow his very heart had riven,
  To win from me such wage thereof
As now no thief would take if given.


III

"I was right chary of the same,
  God wot it was my great folly,
For love of one sly knave of them,
  Good store of that same sweet had he;
  For all my subtle wiles, perdie,
God wot I loved him well enow;
  Right evilly he handled me,
But he loved well my gold, I trow.


IV

"Though I gat bruises green and black,
  I loved him never the less a jot;
Though he bound burdens on my back,
  If he said 'Kiss me and heed it not'
  Right little pain I felt, God wot,
When that foul thief's mouth, found so sweet,
  Kissed me--Much good thereof I got!
I keep the sin and the shame of it.


V

"And he died thirty year agone.
  I am old now, no sweet thing to see;
By God, though, when I think thereon,
  And of that good glad time, woe's me,
  And stare upon my changed body
Stark naked, that has been so sweet,
  Lean, wizen, like a small dry tree,
I am nigh mad with the pain of it.


VI

"Where is my faultless forehead's white,
  The lifted eyebrows, soft gold hair,
Eyes wide apart and keen of sight,
  With subtle skill in the amorous air;
  The straight nose, great nor small, but fair,
The small carved ears of shapeliest growth,
  Chin dimpling, colour good to wear,
And sweet red splendid kissing mouth?


VII

"The shapely slender shoulders small,
  Long arms, hands wrought in glorious wise,
Round little breasts, the hips withal
  High, full of flesh, not scant of size,
  Fit for all amorous masteries;
*** ***** *****, *** *** ****** **** ***
  ******* ***** ** **** ***** ******
** * ***** ****** ** **** *****?


VIII

"A writhled forehead, hair gone grey,
  Fallen eyebrows, eyes gone blind and red,
Their laughs and looks all fled away,
  Yea, all that smote men's hearts are fled;
  The bowed nose, fallen from goodlihead;
Foul flapping ears like water-flags;
  Peaked chin, and cheeks all waste and dead,
And lips that are two skinny rags:


IX

"Thus endeth all the beauty of us.
  The arms made short, the hands made lean,
The shoulders bowed and ruinous,
  The breasts, alack! all fallen in;
  The flanks too, like the breasts, grown thin;
** *** *** ***** *****, *** ** **!
  For the lank thighs, no thighs but skin,
They are specked with spots like sausage-meat.


X

"So we make moan for the old sweet days,
  Poor old light women, two or three
Squatting above the straw-fire's blaze,
  The bosom crushed against the knee,
  Like faggots on a heap we be,
Round fires soon lit, soon quenched and done;
  And we were once so sweet, even we!
Thus fareth many and many an one."



A DOUBLE BALLAD OF GOOD COUNSEL


Now take your fill of love and glee,
       And after balls and banquets hie;
In the end ye'll get no good for fee,
       But just heads broken by and by;
       Light loves make beasts of men that sigh;
They changed the faith of Solomon,
       And left not Samson lights to spy;
Good luck has he that deals with none!

Sweet Orpheus, lord of minstrelsy,
       For this with flute and pipe came nigh
The danger of the dog's heads three
       That ravening at hell's door doth lie;
       Fain was Narcissus, fair and shy,
For love's love lightly lost and won,
       In a deep well to drown and die;
Good luck has he that deals with none!

Sardana, flower of chivalry,
       Who conquered Crete with horn and cry,
For this was fain a maid to be
       And learn with girls the thread to ply;
       King David, wise in prophecy,
Forgot the fear of God for one
       Seen washing either shapely thigh;
Good luck has he that deals with none!

For this did Amnon, craftily
       Feigning to eat of cakes of rye,
Deflower his sister fair to see,
       Which was foul incest; and hereby
       Was Herod moved, it is no lie,
To lop the head of Baptist John
       For dance and jig and psaltery;
Good luck has he that deals with none!

Next of myself I tell, poor me,
       How thrashed like clothes at wash was I
Stark naked, I must needs agree;
       Who made me eat so sour a pie
       But Katherine of Vaucelles? thereby,
Noé took third part of that fun;
       Such wedding-gloves are ill to buy;
Good luck has he that deals with none!

But for that young man fair and free
       To pass those young maids lightly by,
Nay, would you burn him quick, not he;
       Like broom-horsed witches though he fry,
       They are sweet as civet in his eye;
But trust them, and you're fooled anon;
       For white or brown, and low or high,
Good luck has he that deals with none!



FRAGMENT ON DEATH


And Paris be it or Helen dying,
       Who dies soever, dies with pain.
He that lacks breath and wind for sighing,
       His gall bursts on his heart; and then
       He sweats, God knows what sweat!--again,
No man may ease him of his grief;
       Child, brother, sister, none were fain
To bail him thence for his relief.

Death makes him shudder, swoon, wax pale,
       Nose bend, veins stretch, and breath surrender,
Neck swell, flesh soften, joints that fail
       Crack their strained nerves and arteries slender.
       O woman's body found so tender,
Smooth, sweet, so precious in men's eyes,
       Must thou too bear such count to render?
Yes; or pass quick into the skies.


[In the original here follows Villon's masterpiece, the matchless _Ballad
of the Ladies of Old Time_, so incomparably rendered in the marvellous
version of D. G. Rossetti; followed in its turn by the succeeding poem, as
inferior to its companion as is my attempt at translation of it to his
triumph in that higher and harder field.--A. C. S.]




BALLAD OF THE LORDS OF OLD TIME

(AFTER THE FORMER ARGUMENT)


What more? Where is the third Calixt,
       Last of that name now dead and gone,
Who held four years the Papalist?
       Alphonso king of Aragon,
       The gracious lord, duke of Bourbon,
And Arthur, duke of old Britaine?
       And Charles the Seventh, that worthy one?
Even with the good knight Charlemain.

The Scot too, king of mount and mist,
       With half his face vermilion,
Men tell us, like an amethyst
       From brow to chin that blazed and shone;
       The Cypriote king of old renown,
Alas! and that good king of Spain,
       Whose name I cannot think upon?
Even with the good knight Charlemain.

No more to say of them I list;
       'Tis all but vain, all dead and done:
For death may no man born resist,
       Nor make appeal when death comes on.
       I make yet one more question;
Where's Lancelot, king of far Bohain?
       Where's he whose grandson called him son?
Even with the good knight Charlemain.

Where is Guesclin, the good Breton?
       The lord of the eastern mountain-chain,
And the good late duke of Alençon?
       Even with the good knight Charlemain.



BALLAD OF THE WOMEN OF PARIS


Albeit the Venice girls get praise
  For their sweet speech and tender air,
And though the old women have wise ways
  Of chaffering for amorous ware,
  Yet at my peril dare I swear,
Search Rome, where God's grace mainly tarries,
  Florence and Savoy, everywhere,
There's no good girl's lip out of Paris.

The Naples women, as folk prattle,
  Are sweetly spoken and subtle enough:
German girls are good at tattle,
  And Prussians make their boast thereof;
  Take Egypt for the next remove,
Or that waste land the Tartar harries,
  Spain or Greece, for the matter of love,
There's no good girl's lip out of Paris.

Breton and Swiss know nought of the matter,
  Gascony girls or girls of Toulouse;
Two fishwives here with a half-hour's chatter
  Would shut them up by threes and twos;
  Calais, Lorraine, and all their crews,
(Names enow the mad song marries)
  England and Picardy, search them and choose,
There's no good girl's lip out of Paris.

Prince, give praise to our French ladies
  For the sweet sound their speaking carries;
'Twixt Rome and Cadiz many a maid is,
  But no good girl's lip out of Paris.



BALLAD WRITTEN FOR A BRIDEGROOM

WHICH VILLON GAVE TO A GENTLEMAN NEWLY MARRIED TO SEND TO HIS WIFE WHOM HE
HAD WON WITH THE SWORD


At daybreak, when the falcon claps his wings,
  No whit for grief, but noble heart and high,
With loud glad noise he stirs himself and springs,
  And takes his meat and toward his lure draws nigh;
  Such good I wish you! Yea, and heartily
I am fired with hope of true love's meed to get;
  Know that Love writes it in his book; for why,
This is the end for which we twain are met.

Mine own heart's lady with no gainsayings
  You shall be always wholly till I die;
And in my right against all bitter things
  Sweet laurel with fresh rose its force shall try;
  Seeing reason wills not that I cast love by
(Nor here with reason shall I chide or fret)
  Nor cease to serve, but serve more constantly;
This is the end for which we twain are met.

And, which is more, when grief about me clings
  Through Fortune's fit or fume of jealousy,
Your sweet kind eye beats down her threatenings
  As wind doth smoke; such power sits in your eye.
  Thus in your field my seed of harvestry
Thrives, for the fruit is like me that I set;
  God bids me tend it with good husbandry;
This is the end for which we twain are met.

Princess, give ear to this my summary;
  That heart of mine your heart's love should forget
Shall never be: like trust in you put I:
  This is the end for which we twain are met.



BALLAD AGAINST THE ENEMIES OF FRANCE


May he fall in with beasts that scatter fire,
       Like Jason, when he sought the fleece of gold,
Or change from man to beast three years entire,
       As King Nebuchadnezzar did of old;
Or else have times as shameful and as bad
As Trojan folk for ravished Helen had;
Or gulfed with Proserpine and Tantalus
Let hell's deep fen devour him dolorous,
       With worse to bear than Job's worst sufferance,
Bound in his prison-maze with Dædalus,
       Who could wish evil to the state of France!

May he four months, like bitterns in the mire,
       Howl with head downmost in the lake-springs cold,
Or to bear harness like strong bulls for hire
       To the Great Turk for money down be sold;
Or thirty years like Magdalen live sad,
With neither wool nor web of linen clad;
Drown like Narciss', or swing down pendulous
Like Absalom with locks luxurious,
       Or liker Judas fallen to reprobance;
Or find such death as Simon sorcerous,
       Who could wish evil to the state of France!

May the old times come of fierce Octavian's ire,
       And in his belly molten coin be told;
May he like Victor in the mill expire,
       Crushed between moving millstones on him rolled,
Or in deep sea drenched breathless, more adrad
Than in the whale's bulk Jonas, when God bade:
From Phoebus' light, from Juno's treasure-house
Driven, and from joys of Venus amorous,
       And cursed of God most high to the utterance,
As was the Syrian king Antiochus,
       Who could wish evil to the state of France!

Prince, may the bright-winged brood of Æolus
To sea-king Glaucus' wild wood cavernous
       Bear him bereft of peace and hope's least glance,
For worthless is he to get good of us,
       Who could wish evil to the state of France.



THE DISPUTE OF THE HEART AND BODY OF FRANÇOIS VILLON


Who is this I hear?--Lo, this is I, thine heart,
  That holds on merely now by a slender string.
Strength fails me, shape and sense are rent apart,
  The blood in me is turned to a bitter thing,
  Seeing thee skulk here like a dog shivering.--
Yea, and for what?--For that thy sense found sweet.--
What irks it thee?--I feel the sting of it.--
  Leave me at peace.--Why?--Nay now, leave me at peace;
I will repent when I grow ripe in wit.--
  I say no more.--I care not though thou cease.--

What art thou, trow?--A man worth praise, perfay.--
  This is thy thirtieth year of wayfaring.--
'Tis a mule's age.--Art thou a boy still?--Nay.--
  Is it hot lust that spurs thee with its sting,
  Grasping thy throat? Know'st thou not anything?--
Yea, black and white, when milk is specked with flies,
I can make out.--No more?--Nay, in no wise.
  Shall I begin again the count of these?--
Thou art undone.--I will make shift to rise.--
  I say no more.--I care not though thou cease.--

I have the sorrow of it, and thou the smart.
  Wert thou a poor mad fool or weak of wit,
Then might'st thou plead this pretext with thine heart;
  But if thou know not good from evil a whit,
  Either thy head is hard as stone to hit,
Or shame, not honour, gives thee most content.
What canst thou answer to this argument?--
  When I am dead I shall be well at ease.--
God! what good hope!--Thou art over eloquent.--
  I say no more.--I care not though thou cease.--

Whence is this ill?--From sorrow and not from sin.
  When Saturn packed my wallet up for me
I well believe he put these ills therein.--
  Fool, wilt thou make thy servant lord of thee?
Hear now the wise king's counsel; thus saith he:
All power upon the stars a wise man hath;
There is no planet that shall do him scathe.--
  Nay, as they made me I grow and I decrease.--
What say'st thou?--Truly this is all my faith.--
  I say no more.--I care not though thou cease.--

Wouldst thou live still?--God help me that I may!--
Then thou must--What? turn penitent and pray?--
Read always--What?--Grave words and good to say;
  Leave off the ways of fools, lest they displease.--
Good; I will do it.--Wilt thou remember?--Yea.--
Abide not till there come an evil day.
  I say no more.--I care not though thou cease.



EPISTLE IN FORM OF A BALLAD TO HIS FRIENDS


Have pity, pity, friends, have pity on me,
  Thus much at least, may it please you, of your grace!
I lie not under hazel or hawthorn-tree
  Down in this dungeon ditch, mine exile's place
  By leave of God and fortune's foul disgrace.
Girls, lovers, glad young folk and newly wed,
Jumpers and jugglers, tumbling heel o'er head,
  Swift as a dart, and sharp as needle-ware,
Throats clear as bells that ring the kine to shed,
  Your poor old friend, what, will you leave him there?

Singers that sing at pleasure, lawlessly,
  Light, laughing, gay of word and deed, that race
And run like folk light-witted as ye be
  And have in hand nor current coin nor base,
  Ye wait too long, for now he's dying apace.
Rhymers of lays and roundels sung and read,
Ye'll brew him broth too late when he lies dead.
  Nor wind nor lightning, sunbeam nor fresh air,
May pierce the thick wall's bound where lies his bed;
  Your poor old friend, what, will you leave him there?

O noble folk from tithes and taxes free,
  Come and behold him in this piteous case,
Ye that nor king nor emperor holds in fee,
  But only God in heaven; behold his face
  Who needs must fast, Sundays and holidays,
Which makes his teeth like rakes; and when he hath fed
With never a cake for banquet but dry bread,
  Must drench his bowels with much cold watery fare,
With board nor stool, but low on earth instead;
  Your poor old friend, what, will you leave him there?

Princes afore-named, old and young foresaid,
Get me the king's seal and my pardon sped,
  And hoist me in some basket up with care:
So swine will help each other ill bested,
For where one squeaks they run in heaps ahead.
  Your poor old friend, what, will you leave him there?



THE EPITAPH IN FORM OF A BALLAD

WHICH VILLON MADE FOR HIMSELF AND HIS COMRADES, EXPECTING TO BE HANGED
ALONG WITH THEM


Men, brother men, that after us yet live,
  Let not your hearts too hard against us be;
For if some pity of us poor men ye give,
  The sooner God shall take of you pity.
  Here are we five or six strung up, you see,
And here the flesh that all too well we fed
Bit by bit eaten and rotten, rent and shred,
  And we the bones grow dust and ash withal;
Let no man laugh at us discomforted,
  But pray to God that he forgive us all.

If we call on you, brothers, to forgive,
  Ye should not hold our prayer in scorn, though we
Were slain by law; ye know that all alive
  Have not wit alway to walk righteously;
  Make therefore intercession heartily
With him that of a virgin's womb was bred,
That his grace be not as a dry well-head
  For us, nor let hell's thunder on us fall;
We are dead, let no man harry or vex us dead,
  But pray to God that he forgive us all.

The rain has washed and laundered us all five,
  And the sun dried and blackened; yea, perdie,
Ravens and pies with beaks that rend and rive
  Have dug our eyes out, and plucked off for fee
  Our beards and eyebrows; never are we free,
Not once, to rest; but here and there still sped,
Drive at its wild will by the wind's change led,
  More pecked of birds than fruits on garden-wall;
Men, for God's love, let no gibe here be said,
  But pray to God that he forgive us all.

Prince Jesus, that of all art lord and head,
Keep us, that hell be not our bitter bed;
  We have nought to do in such a master's hall.
Be not ye therefore of our fellowhead,
  But pray to God that he forgive us all.



FROM VICTOR HUGO


Take heed of this small child of earth;
       He is great: he hath in him God most high.
Children before their fleshly birth
       Are lights alive in the blue sky.

In our light bitter world of wrong
       They come; God gives us them awhile.
His speech is in their stammering tongue,
       And his forgiveness in their smile.

Their sweet light rests upon our eyes.
       Alas! their right to joy is plain.
If they are hungry, Paradise
       Weeps, and, if cold, Heaven thrills with pain.

The want that saps their sinless flower
       Speaks judgment on sin's ministers.
Man holds an angel in his power.
       Ah! deep in Heaven what thunder stirs,

When God seeks out these tender things
       Whom in the shadow where we sleep
He sends us clothed about with wings,
       And finds them ragged babes that weep!



NOCTURNE


La nuit écoute et se penche sur l'onde
Pour y cueillir rien qu'un souffle d'amour;
Pas de lueur, pas de musique au monde,
Pas de sommeil pour moi ni de séjour.
O mère, ô Nuit, de ta source profonde
Verse-nous, verse enfin l'oubli du jour.

Verse l'oubli de l'angoisse et du jour;
Chante; ton chant assoupit l'âme et l'onde:
Fais de ton sein pour mon âme un séjour,
Elle est bien lasse, ô mère, de ce monde,
Où le baiser ne veut pas dire amour,
Où l'âme aimée est moins que toi profonde.

Car toute chose aimée est moins profonde,
O Nuit, que toi, fille et mère du jour;
Toi dont l'attente est le répit du monde,
Toi dont le souffle est plein de mots d'amour,
Toi dont l'haleine enfle et réprime l'onde,
Toi dont l'ombre a tout le ciel pour séjour.

La misère humble et lasse, sans séjour,
S'abrite et dort sous ton aile profonde;
Tu fais à tous l'aumône de l'amour:
Toutes les soifs viennent boire à ton onde,
Tout ce qui pleure et se dérobe au jour,
Toutes les faims et tous les maux du monde.

Moi seul je veille et ne vois dans ce monde
Que ma douleur qui n'ait point de séjour
Où s'abriter sur ta rive profonde
Et s'endormir sous tes yeux loin du jour;
Je vais toujours cherchant au bord de l'onde
Le sang du beau pied blessé de l'amour.

La mer est sombre où tu naquis, amour,
Pleine des pleurs et des sanglots du monde;
On ne voit plus le gouffre où naît le jour
Luire et frémir sous ta lueur profonde;
Mais dans les coeurs d'homme où tu fais séjour
La douleur monte et baisse comme une onde.


ENVOI

Fille de l'onde et mère de l'amour,
Du haut séjour plein de ta paix profonde
Sur ce bas monde épands un peu de jour.



THÉOPHILE GAUTIER


Pour mettre une couronne au front d'une chanson,
Il semblait qu'en passant son pied semât des roses,
Et que sa main cueillît comme des fleurs écloses
Les étoiles au fond du ciel en floraison.

Sa parole de marbre et d'or avait le son
Des clairons de l'été chassant les jours moroses;
Comme en Thrace Apollon banni des grands cieux roses,
Il regardait du coeur l'Olympe, sa maison.

Le soleil fut pour lui le soleil du vieux monde,
Et son oeil recherchait dans les flots embrasés
Le sillon immortel d'où s'élança sur l'onde
Vénus, que la mer molle enivrait de baisers:
Enfin, dieu ressaisi de sa splendeur première,
Il trône, et son sépulcre est bâti de lumière.



ODE

(LE TOMBEAU DE THÉOPHILE GAUTIER)


Quelle fleur, ô Mort, quel joyau, quel chant,
Quel vent, quel rayon de soleil couchant,
Sur ton front penché, sur ta main avide,
Sur l'âpre pâleur de ta lèvre aride,
       Vibre encore et luit?
Ton sein est sans lait, ton oreille est vide,
       Ton oeil plein de nuit.

Ta bouche est sans souffle et ton front sans ride;
Mais l'éclair voilé d'une flamme humide,
Flamme éclose au coeur d'un ciel pluvieux,
Rallume ta lèvre et remplit tes yeux
       De lueurs d'opale;
Ta bouche est vermeille et ton front joyeux,
       O toi qui fus pâle.

Comme aux jours divins la mère des dieux,
Reine au sein fécond, au corps radieux,
Tu surgis au bord de la tombe amère;
Tu nous apparais, ô Mort, vierge et mère,
       Effroi des humains,
Le divin laurier sur la tête altière
       Et la lyre aux mains.

Nous reconnaissons, courbés vers la terre,
Que c'est la splendeur de ta face austère
Qui dore la nuit de nos longs malheurs;
Que la vie ailée aux mille couleurs,
    Dont tu n'es que l'âme,
Refait par tes mains les prés et les fleurs,
    La rose et la femme.

Lune constante! astre ami des douleurs
Qui luis à travers la brume des pleurs!
Quelle flamme au fond de ta clarté molle
Éclate et rougit, nouvelle auréole,
    Ton doux front voilé?
Quelle étoile, ouvrant ses ailes, s'envole
    Du ciel étoilé?

Pleurant ce rayon de jour qu'on lui vole,
L'homme exècre en vain la Mort triste et folle;
Mais l'astre qui fut à nos yeux si beau,
Là-haut, loin d'ici, dans un ciel nouveau
    Plein d'autres étoiles,
Se lève, et pour lui la nuit du tombeau
    Entr'ouvre ses voiles.

L'âme est dans le corps comme un jeune oiseau
Dont l'aile s'agite au bord du berceau;
La mort, déliant cette aile inquiète,
Quand nous écoutons la bouche muette
    Qui nous dit adieu,
Fait de l'homme infime et sombre un poëte,
    Du poëte un dieu.



IN OBITUM THEOPHILI POETÆ


O lux Pieridum et laurigeri deliciæ dei,
Vox leni Zephyro lenior, ut veris amans novi
Tollit floridulis implicitum primitiis caput,
Ten' ergo abripuit non rediturum, ut redeunt novo
Flores vere novi, te quoque mors irrevocabilem?
Cur vatem neque te Musa parens, te neque Gratiæ,
Nec servare sibi te potuit fidum animi Venus?
Quæ nunc ipsa magis vel puero te Cinyreïo,
Te desiderium et flebilibus lumen amoribus,
Amissum queritur, sanguineis fusa comam genis.
Tantis tu lacrymis digne, comes dulcis Apollini,
Carum nomen eris dîs superis atque sodalibus
Nobis, quîs eadem quæ tibi vivo patuit via
Non æquis patet, at te sequimur passibus haud tuis,
At mæsto cinerem carmine non illacrymabilem
Tristesque exuvias floribus ac fletibus integris
Unà contegimus, nec citharâ nec sine tibiâ,
Votoque unanimæ vocis Ave dicimus et Vale.



AD CATULLUM


Catulle frater, ut velim comes tibi
Remota per vireta, per cavum nemus
Sacrumque Ditis haud inhospiti specus,
Pedem referre, trans aquam Stygis ducem
Secutus unum et unicum, Catulle, te,
Ut ora vatis optimi reviserem,
Tui meique vatis ora, quem scio
Venustiorem adîsse vel tuo lacum,
Benigniora semper arva vel tuis,
Ubi serenus accipit suos deus,
Tegitque myrtus implicata laureâ,
Manuque mulcet halituque consecrat
Fovetque blanda mors amabili sinu,
Et ore fama fervido colit viros
Alitque qualis unus ille par tibi
Britannus unicusque in orbe præstitit
Amicus ille noster, ille ceteris
Poeta major, omnibusque floribus
Priore Landor inclytum rosâ caput
Revinxit extulitque, quam tuâ manu
Recepit ac refovit integram suâ.



DEDICATION

1878


Some nine years gone, as we dwelt together
In the sweet hushed heat of the south French weather
    Ere autumn fell on the vine-tressed hills
Or the season had shed one rose-red feather,

Friend, whose fame is a flame that fills
All eyes it lightens and hearts it thrills
    With joy to be born of the blood which bred
From a land that the grey sea girds and chills

The heart and spirit and hand and head
Whose might is as light on a dark day shed,
    On a day now dark as a land's decline
Where all the peers of your praise are dead,

In a land and season of corn and vine
I pledged you a health from a beaker of mine
    But halfway filled to the lip's edge yet
With hope for honey and song for wine.

Nine years have risen and eight years set
Since there by the wellspring our hands on it met:
    And the pledge of my songs that were then to be,
I could wonder not, friend, though a friend should forget.

For life's helm rocks to the windward and lee,
And time is as wind, and as waves are we;
    And song is as foam that the sea-winds fret,
Though the thought at its heart should be deep as the sea.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Poems & Ballads (Second Series), by 
Algernon Charles Swinburne

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK POEMS & BALLADS (SECOND SERIES) ***

***** This file should be named 27401-8.txt or 27401-8.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/7/4/0/27401/

Produced by Paul Murray, Christina and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


﻿The Project Gutenberg EBook of Studies in Song, A Century of Roundels,
Sonnets on English Dramatic Poets, The Heptalogia, Etc, by Algernon Charles Swinburne

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Studies in Song, A Century of Roundels, Sonnets on English Dramatic Poets, The Heptalogia, Etc
       From Swinburne's Poems Volume V.

Author: Algernon Charles Swinburne

Release Date: July 8, 2006 [EBook #18782]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK STUDIES IN SONG ***




Produced by Paul Murray, Lisa Reigel, and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net





[Transcriber's Note: Greek words in this text have been transliterated
and placed between +marks+. The word "Phoebus" was rendered with an oe
ligature in the original.]




Various Poems:

Athens: An Ode
The Statue of Victor Hugo
Euthanatos
First and Last
Lines on the Death of Edward John Trelawny
Adieux à Marie Stuart
Herse
Twins
The Salt of the Earth
Seven Years Old
Eight Years Old
Comparisons
What is Death?
A Child's Pity
A Child's Laughter
A Child's Thanks
A Child's Battles
A Child's Future
Sunrise


By

Algernon Charles Swinburne

Taken from The Collected Poetical Works of Algernon Charles
Swinburne--Vol V




THE COLLECTED POETICAL WORKS OF ALGERNON CHARLES SWINBURNE

VOL. V

STUDIES IN SONG: A CENTURY OF ROUNDELS: SONNETS ON ENGLISH DRAMATIC
POETS: THE HEPTALOGIA: ETC.




SWINBURNE'S POETICAL WORKS


SWINBURNE'S POETICAL WORKS


  I. POEMS AND BALLADS (First Series).

 II. SONGS BEFORE SUNRISE, AND SONGS OF TWO NATIONS.

III. POEMS AND BALLADS (Second and Third Series), and SONGS OF THE
       SPRINGTIDES.

 IV. TRISTRAM OF LYONESSE, THE TALE OF BALEN, ATALANTA IN CALYDON,
       ERECHTHEUS.

  V. STUDIES IN SONG, A CENTURY OF ROUNDELS, SONNETS ON ENGLISH DRAMATIC
       POETS, THE HEPTALOGIA, ETC.

 VI. A MIDSUMMER HOLIDAY, ASTROPHEL, A CHANNEL PASSAGE AND OTHER POEMS.


LONDON: WILLIAM HEINEMANN




STUDIES IN SONG: A CENTURY OF ROUNDELS: SONNETS ON ENGLISH DRAMATIC
POETS: THE HEPTALOGIA: ETC.

By

Algernon Charles Swinburne


1917

LONDON: WILLIAM HEINEMANN


_First printed_ (_Chatto_), 1904

_Reprinted_ 1904, '09, '10, '12

(_Heinemann_), 1917


_London: William Heinemann_, 1917




                                                   PAGE
ATHENS: AN ODE                                      194

THE STATUE OF VICTOR HUGO                           215

EUTHANATOS                                          252

FIRST AND LAST                                      255

LINES ON THE DEATH OF EDWARD JOHN TRELAWNY          257

ADIEUX À MARIE STUART                               259

HERSE                                               264

TWINS                                               267

THE SALT OF THE EARTH                               272

SEVEN YEARS OLD                                     273

EIGHT YEARS OLD                                     275

COMPARISONS                                         278

WHAT IS DEATH?                                      280

A CHILD'S PITY                                      281

A CHILD'S LAUGHTER                                  283

A CHILD'S THANKS                                    285

A CHILD'S BATTLES                                   287

A CHILD'S FUTURE                                    293

SUNRISE                                             368




     ATHENS: AN ODE




     ATHENS

     AN ODE


     Ere from under earth again like fire the violet kindle,  [_Str. 1._
       Ere the holy buds and hoar on olive-branches bloom,
     Ere the crescent of the last pale month of winter dwindle,
       Shrink, and fall as falls a dead leaf on the dead month's tomb,
     Round the hills whose heights the first-born olive-blossom
           brightened,
       Round the city brow-bound once with violets like a bride,
     Up from under earth again a light that long since lightened
       Breaks, whence all the world took comfort as all time takes
           pride.
     Pride have all men in their fathers that were free before them,
       In the warriors that begat us free-born pride have we:
     But the fathers of their spirits, how may men adore them,
       With what rapture may we praise, who bade our souls be free?
     Sons of Athens born in spirit and truth are all born free men;
       Most of all, we, nurtured where the north wind holds his reign:
     Children all we sea-folk of the Salaminian seamen,
       Sons of them that beat back Persia they that beat back Spain.
     Since the songs of Greece fell silent, none like ours have risen;
       Since the sails of Greece fell slack, no ships have sailed like
           ours;
     How should we lament not, if her spirit sit in prison?
       How should we rejoice not, if her wreaths renew their flowers?
     All the world is sweeter, if the Athenian violet quicken:
       All the world is brighter, if the Athenian sun return:
     All things foul on earth wax fainter, by that sun's light stricken:
       All ill growths are withered, where those fragrant flower-lights
           burn.
     All the wandering waves of seas with all their warring waters
       Roll the record on for ever of the sea-fight there,
     When the capes were battle's lists, and all the straits were
           slaughter's,
       And the myriad Medes as foam-flakes on the scattering air.
     Ours the lightning was that cleared the north and lit the nations,
       But the light that gave the whole world light of old was she:
     Ours an age or twain, but hers are endless generations:
       All the world is hers at heart, and most of all are we.

     Ye that bear the name about you of her glory,            [_Ant. 1._
       Men that wear the sign of Greeks upon you sealed,
     Yours is yet the choice to write yourselves in story
       Sons of them that fought the Marathonian field.
     Slaves of no man were ye, said your warrior poet,
       Neither subject unto man as underlings:
     Yours is now the season here wherein to show it,
       If the seed ye be of them that knew not kings.
     If ye be not, swords nor words alike found brittle
       From the dust of death to raise you shall prevail:
     Subject swords and dead men's words may stead you little,
       If their old king-hating heart within you fail.
     If your spirit of old, and not your bonds, be broken,
       If the kingless heart be molten in your breasts,
     By what signs and wonders, by what word or token,
       Shall ye drive the vultures from your eagles' nests?
     All the gains of tyrants Freedom counts for losses;
       Nought of all the work done holds she worth the work,
     When the slaves whose faith is set on crowns and crosses
       Drive the Cossack bear against the tiger Turk.
     Neither cross nor crown nor crescent shall ye bow to,
       Nought of Araby nor Jewry, priest nor king:
     As your watchword was of old, so be it now too:
       As from lips long stilled, from yours let healing spring.
     Through the fights of old, your battle-cry was healing,
       And the Saviour that ye called on was the Sun:
     Dawn by dawn behold in heaven your God, revealing
       Light from darkness as when Marathon was won.
     Gods were yours yet strange to Turk or Galilean,
       Light and Wisdom only then as gods adored:
     Pallas was your shield, your comforter was Pæan,
       From your bright world's navel spake the Sun your Lord.

     Though the names be lost, and changed the signs of Light and Wisdom
           be,                                                 [_Ep. 1._
     By these only shall men conquer, by these only be set free:
     When the whole world's eye was Athens, these were yours, and theirs
           were ye.
     Light was given you of your wisdom, light ye gave the world again:
     As the sun whose godhead lightened on her soul was Hellas then:
     Yea, the least of all her children as the chosen of other men.
     Change your hearts not with your garments, nor your faith with
           creeds that change:
     Truth was yours, the truth which time and chance transform not nor
           estrange:
     Purer truth nor higher abides not in the reach of time's whole
           range.
     Gods are they in all men's memories and for all time's periods,
     They that hurled the host back seaward which had scourged the sea
           with rods:
     Gods for us are all your fathers, even the least of these as gods.
     In the dark of days the thought of them is with us, strong to save,
     They that had no lord, and made the Great King lesser than a slave;
     They that rolled all Asia back on Asia, broken like a wave.
     No man's men were they, no master's and no God's but these their
           own:
     Gods not loved in vain nor served amiss, nor all yet overthrown:
     Love of country, Freedom, Wisdom, Light, and none save these alone.
     King by king came up against them, sire and son, and turned to
           flee:
     Host on host roared westward, mightier each than each, if more
           might be:
     Field to field made answer, clamorous like as wave to wave at sea.
     Strife to strife responded, loud as rocks to clangorous rocks
           respond
     Where the deep rings wreck to seamen held in tempest's thrall and
           bond,
     Till when war's bright work was perfect peace as radiant rose
           beyond:
     Peace made bright with fruit of battle, stronger made for storm
           gone down,
     With the flower of song held heavenward for the violet of her crown
     Woven about the fragrant forehead of the fostress maiden's town.
     Gods arose alive on earth from under stroke of human hands:
     As the hands that wrought them, these are dead, and mixed with
           time's dead sands:
     But the godhead of supernal song, though these now stand not,
           stands.
     Pallas is not, Phoebus breathes no more in breathing brass or
           gold:
     Clytæmnestra towers, Cassandra wails, for ever: Time is bold,
     But nor heart nor hand hath he to unwrite the scriptures writ of
           old.
     Dead the great chryselephantine God, as dew last evening shed:
     Dust of earth or foam of ocean is the symbol of his head:
     Earth and ocean shall be shadows when Prometheus shall be dead.

     Fame around her warriors living rang through Greece and lightened,
                                                              [_Str. 2._
       Moving equal with their stature, stately with their strength:
     Thebes and Lacedæmon at their breathing presence brightened,
       Sense or sound of them filled all the live land's breadth and
           length.
     All the lesser tribes put on the pure Athenian fashion,
       One Hellenic heart was from the mountains to the sea:
     Sparta's bitter self grew sweet with high half-human passion,
       And her dry thorns flushed aflower in strait Thermopylæ.
     Fruitless yet the flowers had fallen, and all the deeds died
           fruitless,
       Save that tongues of after men, the children of her peace,
     Took the tale up of her glories, transient else and rootless,
       And in ears and hearts of all men left the praise of Greece.
     Fair the war-time was when still, as beacon answering beacon,
       Sea to land flashed fight, and thundered note of wrath or cheer;
     But the strength of noonday night hath power to waste and weaken,
       Nor may light be passed from hand to hand of year to year
     If the dying deed be saved not, ere it die for ever,
       By the hands and lips of men more wise than years are strong;
     If the soul of man take heed not that the deed die never,
       Clothed about with purple and gold of story, crowned with song.
     Still the burning heart of boy and man alike rejoices,
       Hearing words which made it seem of old for all who sang
     That their heaven of heavens waxed happier when from free men's
           voices
       _Well-beloved Harmodius and Aristogeiton_ rang.
     Never fell such fragrance from the flower-month's rose-red kirtle
       As from chaplets on the bright friends' brows who slew their
           lord:
     Greener grew the leaf and balmier blew the flower of myrtle
       When its blossom sheathed the sheer tyrannicidal sword.
     None so glorious garland crowned the feast Panathenæan
       As this wreath too frail to fetter fast the Cyprian dove:
     None so fiery song sprang sunwards annual as the pæan
       Praising perfect love of friends and perfect country's love.

     Higher than highest of all those heavens wherefrom the starry
                                                              [_Ant. 2._
       Song of Homer shone above the rolling fight,
     Gleams like spring's green bloom on boughs all gaunt and gnarry
       Soft live splendour as of flowers of foam in flight,
     Glows a glory of mild-winged maidens upward mounting
       Sheer through air made shrill with strokes of smooth swift wings
     Round the rocks beyond foot's reach, past eyesight's counting,
       Up the cleft where iron wind of winter rings
     Round a God fast clenched in iron jaws of fetters,
       Him who culled for man the fruitful flower of fire,
     Bared the darkling scriptures writ in dazzling letters,
       Taught the truth of dreams deceiving men's desire,
     Gave their water-wandering chariot-seats of ocean
       Wings, and bade the rage of war-steeds champ the rein,
     Showed the symbols of the wild birds' wheeling motion,
       Waged for man's sake war with God and all his train.
     Earth, whose name was also Righteousness, a mother
       Many-named and single-natured, gave him breath
     Whence God's wrath could wring but this word and none other--
       _He may smite me, yet he shall not do to death._
     Him the tongue that sang triumphant while tormented
       Sang as loud the sevenfold storm that roared erewhile
     Round the towers of Thebes till wrath might rest contented:
       Sang the flight from smooth soft-sanded banks of Nile,
     When like mateless doves that fly from snare or tether
       Came the suppliants landwards trembling as they trod,
     And the prayer took wing from all their tongues together--
       _King of kings, most holy of holies, blessed God._
     But what mouth may chant again, what heart may know it,
       All the rapture that all hearts of men put on
     When of Salamis the time-transcending poet
       Sang, whose hand had chased the Mede at Marathon?

     Darker dawned the song with stormier wings above the watch-fire
           spread                                              [_Ep. 2._
     Whence from Ida toward the hill of Hermes leapt the light that said
     Troy was fallen, a torch funereal for the king's triumphal head.
     Dire indeed the birth of Leda's womb that had God's self to sire
     Bloomed, a flower of love that stung the soul with fangs that gnaw
           like fire:
     But the twin-born human-fathered sister-flower bore fruit more
           dire.
     Scarce the cry that called on airy heaven and all swift winds on
           wing,
     Wells of river-heads, and countless laugh of waves past reckoning,
     Earth which brought forth all, and the orbèd sun that looks on
           everything,
     Scarce that cry fills yet men's hearts more full of heart-devouring
           dread
     Than the murderous word said mocking, how the child whose blood he
           shed
     Might clasp fast and kiss her father where the dead salute the
           dead.
     But the latter note of anguish from the lips that mocked her lord,
     When her son's hand bared against the breast that suckled him his
           sword,
     How might man endure, O Æschylus, to hear it and record?
     How might man endure, being mortal yet, O thou most highest, to
           hear?
     How record, being born of woman? Surely not thy Furies near,
     Surely this beheld, this only, blasted hearts to death with fear.
     Not the hissing hair, nor flakes of blood that oozed from eyes of
           fire,
     Nor the snort of savage sleep that snuffed the hungering heart's
           desire
     Where the hunted prey found hardly space and harbour to respire;
     She whose likeness called them--"Sleep ye, ho? what need of you
           that sleep?"
     (Ah, what need indeed, where she was, of all shapes that night may
           keep
     Hidden dark as death and deeper than men's dreams of hell are
           deep?)
     She the murderess of her husband, she the huntress of her son,
     More than ye was she, the shadow that no God withstands but one,
     Wisdom equal-eyed and stronger and more splendid than the sun.
     Yea, no God may stand betwixt us and the shadows of our deeds,
     Nor the light of dreams that lighten darkness, nor the prayer that
           pleads,
     But the wisdom equal-souled with heaven, the light alone that
           leads.
     Light whose law bids home those childless children of eternal
           night,
     Soothed and reconciled and mastered and transmuted in men's sight
     Who behold their own souls, clothed with darkness once, now clothed
           with light.
     King of kings and father crowned of all our fathers crowned of
           yore,
     Lord of all the lords of song, whose head all heads bow down
           before,
     Glory be to thee from all thy sons in all tongues evermore.

     Rose and vine and olive and deep ivy-bloom entwining     [_Str. 3._
       Close the goodliest grave that e'er they closeliest might entwine
     Keep the wind from wasting and the sun from too strong shining
       Where the sound and light of sweetest songs still float and
           shine.
     Here the music seems to illume the shade, the light to whisper
       Song, the flowers to put not odours only forth, but words
     Sweeter far than fragrance: here the wandering wreaths twine
           crisper
       Far, and louder far exults the note of all wild birds.
     Thoughts that change us, joys that crown and sorrows that enthrone
           us,
       Passions that enrobe us with a clearer air than ours,
     Move and breathe as living things beheld round white Colonus,
       Audibler than melodies and visibler than flowers.
     Love, in fight unconquered, Love, with spoils of great men laden,
       Never sang so sweet from throat of woman or of dove:
     Love, whose bed by night is in the soft cheeks of a maiden,
       And his march is over seas, and low roofs lack not Love;
     Nor may one of all that live, ephemeral or eternal,
       Fly nor hide from Love; but whoso clasps him fast goes mad.
     Never since the first-born year with flowers first-born grew vernal
       Such a song made listening hearts of lovers glad or sad.
     Never sounded note so radiant at the rayless portal
       Opening wide on the all-concealing lowland of the dead
     As the music mingling, when her doomsday marked her mortal,
       From her own and old men's voices round the bride's way shed,
     Round the grave her bride-house, hewn for endless habitation,
       Where, shut out from sunshine, with no bridegroom by, she slept;
     But beloved of all her dark and fateful generation,
       But with all time's tears and praise besprinkled and bewept:
     Well-beloved of outcast father and self-slaughtered mother,
       Born, yet unpolluted, of their blind incestuous bed;
     Best-beloved of him for whose dead sake she died, her brother,
       Hallowing by her own life's gift her own born brother's head;

     Not with wine or oil nor any less libation               [_Ant. 3._
       Hallowed, nor made sweet with humbler perfume's breath;
     Not with only these redeemed from desecration,
       But with blood and spirit of life poured forth to death;
     Blood unspotted, spirit unsullied, life devoted,
       Sister too supreme to make the bride's hope good,
     Daughter too divine as woman to be noted,
       Spouse of only death in mateless maidenhood.
     Yea, in her was all the prayer fulfilled, the saying
       All accomplished--_Would that fate would let me wear
     Hallowed innocence of words and all deeds, weighing
       Well the laws thereof, begot on holier air,
     Far on high sublimely stablished, whereof only
       Heaven is father; nor did birth of mortal mould
     Bring them forth, nor shall oblivion lull to lonely
       Slumber. Great in these is God, and grows not old._
     Therefore even that inner darkness where she perished
       Surely seems as holy and lovely, seen aright,
     As desirable and as dearly to be cherished,
       As the haunt closed in with laurels from the light,
     Deep inwound with olive and wild vine inwoven,
       Where a godhead known and unknown makes men pale,
     But the darkness of the twilight noon is cloven
       Still with shrill sweet moan of many a nightingale.
     Closer clustering there they make sweet noise together,
       Where the fearful gods look gentler than our fear,
     And the grove thronged through with birds of holiest feather
       Grows nor pale nor dumb with sense of dark things near.
     There her father, called upon with signs of wonder,
       Passed with tenderest words away by ways unknown,
     Not by sea-storm stricken down, nor touched of thunder,
       To the dark benign deep underworld, alone.

     Third of three that ruled in Athens, kings with sceptral song for
           staff,                                              [_Ep. 3._
     Gladdest heart that God gave ever milk and wine of thought to
           quaff,
     Clearest eye that lightened ever to the broad lip's lordliest
           laugh,
     Praise be thine as theirs whose tragic brows the loftier leaf
           engirds
     For the live and lyric lightning of thy honey-hearted words,
     Soft like sunny dewy wings of clouds and bright as crying of birds;
     Full of all sweet rays and notes that make of earth and air and sea
     One great light and sound of laughter from one great God's heart,
           to be
     Sign and semblance of the gladness of man's life where men breathe
           free.
     With no Loxian sound obscure God uttered once, and all time heard,
     All the soul of Athens, all the soul of England, in that word:
     Rome arose the second child of freedom: northward rose the third.
     Ere her Boreal dawn came kindling seas afoam and fields of snow,
     Yet again, while Europe groaned and grovelled, shone like suns
           aglow
     Doria splendid over Genoa, Venice bright with Dandolo.
     Dead was Hellas, but Ausonia by the light of dead men's deeds
     Rose and walked awhile alive, though mocked as whom the fen-fire
           leads
     By the creed-wrought faith of faithless souls that mock their
           doubts with creeds.
     Dead are these, and man is risen again: and haply now the three
     Yet coequal and triune may stand in story, marked as free
     By the token of the washing of the waters of the sea.
     Athens first of all earth's kindred many-tongued and many-kinned
     Had the sea to friend and comfort, and for kinsman had the wind:
     She that bare Columbus next: then she that made her spoil of Ind.
     She that hears not what man's rage but only what the sea-wind
           saith:
     She that turned Spain's ships to cloud-wrack at the blasting of her
           breath,
     By her strengths of strong-souled children and of strong winds done
           to death.
     North and south the Great King's galleons went in Persian wise: and
           here
     She, with Æschylean music on her lips that laughed back fear,
     In the face of Time's grey godhead shook the splendour of her
           spear.
     Fair as Athens then with foot upon her foeman's front, and strong
     Even as Athens for redemption of the world from sovereign wrong,
     Like as Athens crowned she stood before the sun with crowning song.
     All the world is theirs with whom is freedom: first of all the
           free,
     Blest are they whom song has crowned and clothed with blessing:
           these as we,
     These alone have part in spirit with the sun that crowns the sea.

     _April 1881._




     THE STATUE OF VICTOR HUGO


     1

     Since in Athens God stood plain for adoration,
       Since the sun beheld his likeness reared in stone,
     Since the bronze or gold of human consecration
       Gave to Greece her guardian's form and feature shown,
     Never hand of sculptor, never heart of nation,
       Found so glorious aim in all these ages flown
     As is theirs who rear for all time's acclamation
       Here the likeness of our mightiest and their own.


     2

     Theirs and ours and all men's living who behold him
       Crowned with garlands multiform and manifold;
     Praise and thanksgiving of all mankind enfold him
       Who for all men casts abroad his gifts of gold.
     With the gods of song have all men's tongues enrolled him,
       With the helpful gods have all men's hearts enrolled:
     Ours he is who love him, ours whose hearts' hearts hold him
       Fast as his the trust that hearts like his may hold.


     3

     He, the heart most high, the spirit on earth most blameless,
       Takes in charge all spirits, holds all hearts in trust:
     As the sea-wind's on the sea his ways are tameless,
       As the laws that steer the world his works are just.
     All most noble feel him nobler, all most shameless
       Feel his wrath and scorn make pale their pride and lust:
     All most poor and lowliest, all whose wrongs were nameless,
       Feel his word of comfort raise them from the dust.


     4

     Pride of place and lust of empire bloody-fruited
       Knew the blasting of his breath on leaf and fruit:
     Now the hand that smote the death-tree now disrooted
       Plants the refuge-tree that has man's hope for root.
     Ah, but we by whom his darkness was saluted,
       How shall now all we that see his day salute?
     How should love not seem by love's own speech confuted,
       Song before the sovereign singer not be mute?


     5

     With what worship, by what blessing, in what measure,
       May we sing of him, salute him, or adore,
     With what hymn for praise, what thanksgiving for pleasure,
       Who had given us more than heaven, and gives us more?
     Heaven's whole treasury, filled up full with night's whole
           treasure,
       Holds not so divine or deep a starry store
     As the soul supreme that deals forth worlds at leisure
       Clothed with light and darkness, dense with flower and ore.


     6

     Song had touched the bourn: fresh verses overflow it,
       Loud and radiant, waves on waves on waves that throng;
     Still the tide grows, and the sea-mark still below it
       Sinks and shifts and rises, changed and swept along.
     Rose it like a rock? the waters overthrow it,
       And another stands beyond them sheer and strong:
     Goal by goal pays down its prize, and yields its poet
       Tribute claimed of triumph, palm achieved of song.


     7

     Since his hand that holds the keys of fear and wonder
       Opened on the high priest's dreaming eyes a door
     Whence the lights of heaven and hell above and under
       Shone, and smote the face that men bow down before,
     Thrice again one singer's note had cloven in sunder
       Night, who blows again not one blast now but four,
     And the fourfold heaven is kindled with his thunder,
       And the stars about his forehead are fourscore.


     8

     From the deep soul's depths where alway love abounded
       First had risen a song with healing on its wings
     Whence the dews of mercy raining balms unbounded
       Shed their last compassion even on sceptred things.[1]
     Even on heads that like a curse the crown surrounded
       Fell his crowning pity, soft as cleansing springs;
     And the sweet last note his wrath relenting sounded
       Bade men's hearts be melted not for slaves but kings.


     9

     Next, that faith might strengthen fear and love embolden,
       On the creeds of priests a scourge of sunbeams fell:
     And its flash made bare the deeps of heaven, beholden
       Not of men that cry, Lord, Lord, from church or cell.[2]
     Hope as young as dawn from night obscure and olden
       Rose again, such power abides in truth's one spell:
     Night, if dawn it be that touches her, grows golden;
       Tears, if such as angels weep, extinguish hell.


     10

     Through the blind loud mills of barren blear-eyed learning
       Where in dust and darkness children's foreheads bow,
     While men's labour, vain as wind or water turning
       Wheels and sails of dreams, makes life a leafless bough,
     Fell the light of scorn and pity touched with yearning,
       Next, from words that shone as heaven's own kindling brow.[3]
     Stars were these as watch-fires on the world's waste burning,
       Stars that fade not in the fourfold sunrise now.[4]


     11

     Now the voice that faints not till all wrongs be wroken
       Sounds as might the sun's song from the morning's breast,
     All the seals of silence sealed of night are broken,
       All the winds that bear the fourfold word are blest.
     All the keen fierce east flames forth one fiery token;
       All the north is loud with life that knows not rest,
     All the south with song as though the stars had spoken;
       All the judgment-fire of sunset scathes the west.


     12

     Sound of pæan, roll of chanted panegyric,
       Though by Pindar's mouth song's trumpet spake forth praise,
     March of warrior songs in Pythian mood or Pyrrhic,
       Though the blast were blown by lips of ancient days,

     Ring not clearer than the clarion of satiric
       Song whose breath sweeps bare the plague-infected ways
     Till the world be pure as heaven is for the lyric
       Sun to rise up clothed with radiant sounds as rays.


     13

     Clear across the cloud-rack fluctuant and erratic
       As the strong star smiles that lets no mourner mourn,
     Hymned alike from lips of Lesbian choirs or Attic
       Once at evensong and morning newly born,
     Clear and sure above the changes of dramatic
       Tide and current, soft with love and keen with scorn,
     Smiles the strong sweet soul of maidenhood, ecstatic
       And inviolate as the red glad mouth of morn.


     14

     Pure and passionate as dawn, whose apparition
       Thrills with fire from heaven the wheels of hours that whirl,
     Rose and passed her radiance in serene transition
       From his eyes who sought a grain and found a pearl.
     But the food by cunning hope for vain fruition
       Lightly stolen away from keeping of a churl
     Left the bitterness of death and hope's perdition
       On the lip that scorn was wont for shame to curl.[5]


     15

     Over waves that darken round the wave-worn rover
       Rang his clarion higher than winds cried round the ship,
     Rose a pageant of set suns and storms blown over,
       Hands that held life's guerdons fast or let them slip.
     But no tongue may tell, no thanksgiving discover,
       Half the heaven of blessing, soft with clouds that drip,
     Keen with beams that kindle, dear as love to lover,
       Opening by the spell's strength on his lyric lip.


     16

     By that spell the soul transfigured and dilated
       Puts forth wings that widen, breathes a brightening air,
     Feeds on light and drinks of music, whence elated
       All her sense grows godlike, seeing all depths made bare,
     All the mists wherein before she sat belated
       Shrink, till now the sunlight knows not if they were;
     All this earth transformed is Eden recreated,
       With the breath of heaven remurmuring in her hair.


     17

     Sweeter far than aught of sweet that April nurses
       Deep in dew-dropt woodland folded fast and furled
     Breathes the fragrant song whose burning dawn disperses
       Darkness, like the surge of armies backward hurled,
     Even as though the touch of spring's own hand, that pierces
       Earth with life's delight, had hidden in the impearled
     Golden bells and buds and petals of his verses
       All the breath of all the flowers in all the world.


     18

     But the soul therein, the light that our souls follow,
       Fires and fills the song with more of prophet's pride,
     More of life than all the gulfs of death may swallow,
       More of flame than all the might of night may hide.
     Though the whole dark age were loud and void and hollow,
       Strength of trust were here, and help for all souls tried,
     And a token from the flight of that strange swallow[6]
       Whose migration still is toward the wintry side.


     19

     Never came such token for divine solution
       From the oraculous live darkness whence of yore
     Ancient faith sought word of help and retribution,
       Truth to lighten doubt, a sign to go before.
     Never so baptismal waters of ablution
       Bathed the brows of exile on so stern a shore,
     Where the lightnings of the sea of revolution
       Flashed across them ere its thunders yet might roar.


     20

     By the lightning's light of present revelation
       Shown, with epic thunder as from skies that frown,
     Clothed in darkness as of darkling expiation,
       Rose a vision of dead, stars and suns gone down,
     Whence of old fierce fire devoured the star-struck nation,
       Till its wrath and woe lit red the raging town,
     Now made glorious with his statue's crowning station,
       Where may never gleam again a viler crown.


     21

     King, with time for throne and all the years for pages,
       He shall reign though all thrones else be overhurled,
     Served of souls that have his living words for wages,
       Crowned of heaven each dawn that leaves his brows impearled;
     Girt about with robes unrent of storm that rages,
       Robes not wrought with hands, from no loom's weft unfurled;
     All the praise of all earth's tongues in all earth's ages,
       All the love of all men's hearts in all the world.


     22

     Yet what hand shall carve the soul or cast the spirit,
       Mould the face of fame, bid glory's feature glow?
     Who bequeath for eyes of ages hence to inherit
       Him, the Master, whom love knows not if it know?
     Scarcely perfect praise of men man's work might merit,
       Scarcely bid such aim to perfect stature grow,
     Were his hand the hand of Phidias who shall rear it,
       And his soul the very soul of Angelo.


     23

     Michael, awful angel of the world's last session,
       Once on earth, like him, with fire of suffering tried,
     Thine it were, if man's it were, without transgression,
       Thine alone, to take this toil upon thy pride.
     Thine, whose heart was great against the world's oppression,
       Even as his whose word is lamp and staff and guide:
     Advocate for man, untired of intercession,
       Pleads his voice for slaves whose lords his voice defied.


     24

     Earth, with all the kings and thralls on earth, below it,
       Heaven alone, with all the worlds in heaven, above,
     Let his likeness rise for suns and stars to know it,
       High for men to worship, plain for men to love:
     Brow that braved the tides which fain would overflow it,
       Lip that gave the challenge, hand that flung the glove;
     Comforter and prophet, Paraclete and poet,
       Soul whose emblems are an eagle and a dove.


     25

     Sun, that hast not seen a loftier head wax hoary,
       Earth, which hast not shown the sun a nobler birth,
     Time, that hast not on thy scroll defiled and gory
       One man's name writ brighter in its whole wide girth,
     Witness, till the final years fulfil their story,
       Till the stars break off the music of their mirth,
     What among the sons of men was this man's glory,
       What the vesture of his soul revealed on earth.


FOOTNOTES:

[1] _La Pitié Suprême._ 1879.

[2] _Religions et Religion._ 1880.

[3] _L'Ane._ 1880.

[4] _Les Quatre Vents de l'Esprit._ I. _Le Livre satirique._ II. _Le
Livre dramatique._ III. _Le Livre lyrique._ IV. _Le Livre épique._ 1881.

[5] _Les Deux Trouvailles de Gallus._ I. _Margarita, comédie._ II.
_Esca, drame._

[6]

     Je suis une hirondelle étrange, car j'émigre
           Du côté de l'hiver.

                        _Le Livre Lyrique_, liii.




     EUTHANATOS

     IN MEMORY OF MRS. THELLUSSON


           Forth of our ways and woes,
           Forth of the winds and snows,
           A white soul soaring goes,
             Winged like a dove:
           So sweet, so pure, so clear,
           So heavenly tempered here,
     Love need not hope or fear her changed above:

           Ere dawned her day to die,
           So heavenly, that on high
           Change could not glorify
             Nor death refine her:
           Pure gold of perfect love,
           On earth like heaven's own dove,
     She cannot wear, above, a smile diviner.

           Her voice in heaven's own quire
           Can sound no heavenlier lyre
           Than here: no purer fire
             Her soul can soar:
           No sweeter stars her eyes
           In unimagined skies
     Beyond our sight can rise than here before.

           Hardly long years had shed
           Their shadows on her head:
           Hardly we think her dead,
             Who hardly thought her
           Old: hardly can believe
           The grief our hearts receive
     And wonder while they grieve, as wrong were wrought her.

           But though strong grief be strong
           No word or thought of wrong
           May stain the trembling song,
             Wring the bruised heart,
           That sounds or sighs its faint
           Low note of love, nor taint
     Grief for so sweet a saint, when such depart.

           A saint whose perfect soul,
           With perfect love for goal,
           Faith hardly might control,
             Creeds might not harden:
           A flower more splendid far
           Than the most radiant star
     Seen here of all that are in God's own garden.

           Surely the stars we see
           Rise and relapse as we,
           And change and set, may be
             But shadows too:
           But spirits that man's lot
           Could neither mar nor spot
     Like these false lights are not, being heavenly true.

           Not like these dying lights
           Of worlds whose glory smites
           The passage of the nights
             Through heaven's blind prison:
           Not like their souls who see,
           If thought fly far and free,
     No heavenlier heaven to be for souls rerisen.

           A soul wherein love shone
           Even like the sun, alone,
           With fervour of its own
             And splendour fed,
           Made by no creeds less kind
           Toward souls by none confined,
     Could Death's self quench or blind, Love's self were dead.

     _February 4, 1881._




     FIRST AND LAST


     Upon the borderlands of being,
       Where life draws hardly breath
     Between the lights and shadows fleeing
       Fast as a word one saith,
     Two flowers rejoice our eyesight, seeing
       The dawns of birth and death.

     Behind the babe his dawn is lying
       Half risen with notes of mirth
     From all the winds about it flying
       Through new-born heaven and earth:
     Before bright age his day for dying
       Dawns equal-eyed with birth.

     Equal the dews of even and dawn,
       Equal the sun's eye seen
     A hand's breadth risen and half withdrawn:
       But no bright hour between
     Brings aught so bright by stream or lawn
       To noonday growths of green.

     Which flower of life may smell the sweeter
       To love's insensual sense,
     Which fragrance move with offering meeter
       His soothed omnipotence,
     Being chosen as fairer or as fleeter,
       Borne hither or borne hence,
     Love's foiled omniscience knows not: this
       Were more than all he knows
     With all his lore of bale and bliss,
       The choice of rose and rose,
     One red as lips that touch with his,
       One white as moonlit snows.

     No hope is half so sweet and good,
       No dream of saint or sage
     So fair as these are: no dark mood
       But these might best assuage;
     The sweet red rose of babyhood,
       The white sweet rose of age.




     LINES ON THE DEATH OF EDWARD JOHN TRELAWNY


     Last high star of the years whose thunder
       Still men's listening remembrance hears,
       Last light left of our fathers' years,
     Watched with honour and hailed with wonder
     Thee too then have the years borne under,
       Thou too then hast regained thy peers.

     Wings that warred with the winds of morning,
       Storm-winds rocking the red great dawn,
       Close at last, and a film is drawn
     Over the eyes of the storm-bird, scorning
     Now no longer the loud wind's warning,
       Waves that threaten or waves that fawn.

     Peers were none of thee left us living,
       Peers of theirs we shall see no more.
       Eight years over the full fourscore
     Knew thee: now shalt thou sleep, forgiving
     All griefs past of the wild world's giving,
       Moored at last on the stormless shore.

     Worldwide liberty's lifelong lover,
       Lover no less of the strength of song,
       Sea-king, swordsman, hater of wrong,
     Over thy dust that the dust shall cover
     Comes my song as a bird to hover,
       Borne of its will as of wings along.

     Cherished of thee were this brief song's brothers
       Now that follows them, cherishing thee.
       Over the tides and the tideless sea
     Soft as a smile of the earth our mother's
     Flies it faster than all those others,
       First of the troop at thy tomb to be.

     Memories of Greece and the mountain's hollow
       Guarded alone of thy loyal sword
       Hold thy name for our hearts in ward:
     Yet more fain are our hearts to follow
     One way now with the southward swallow
       Back to the grave of the man their lord.

     Heart of hearts, art thou moved not, hearing
       Surely, if hearts of the dead may hear,
       Whose true heart it is now draws near?
     Surely the sense of it thrills thee, cheering
     Darkness and death with the news now nearing--
       Shelley, Trelawny rejoins thee here.




     ADIEUX À MARIE STUART


     I

     Queen, for whose house my fathers fought,
         With hopes that rose and fell,
     Red star of boyhood's fiery thought,
         Farewell.

     They gave their lives, and I, my queen,
         Have given you of my life,
     Seeing your brave star burn high between
         Men's strife.

     The strife that lightened round their spears
         Long since fell still: so long
     Hardly may hope to last in years
         My song.

     But still through strife of time and thought
         Your light on me too fell:
     Queen, in whose name we sang or fought,
         Farewell.


     II

     There beats no heart on either border
         Wherethrough the north blasts blow
     But keeps your memory as a warder
         His beacon-fire aglow.

     Long since it fired with love and wonder
         Mine, for whose April age
     Blithe midsummer made banquet under
         The shade of Hermitage.

     Soft sang the burn's blithe notes, that gather
         Strength to ring true:
     And air and trees and sun and heather
         Remembered you.

     Old border ghosts of fight or fairy
         Or love or teen,
     These they forgot, remembering Mary
         The Queen.


     III

     Queen once of Scots and ever of ours
         Whose sires brought forth for you
     Their lives to strew your way like flowers.
         Adieu.

     Dead is full many a dead man's name
         Who died for you this long
     Time past: shall this too fare the same,
         My song?

     But surely, though it die or live,
         Your face was worth
     All that a man may think to give
         On earth.

     No darkness cast of years between
         Can darken you:
     Man's love will never bid my queen
         Adieu.


     IV

     Love hangs like light about your name
         As music round the shell:
     No heart can take of you a tame
         Farewell.

     Yet, when your very face was seen,
         Ill gifts were yours for giving:
     Love gat strange guerdons of my queen
         When living.

     O diamond heart unflawed and clear,
         The whole world's crowning jewel!
     Was ever heart so deadly dear
         So cruel?

     Yet none for you of all that bled
         Grudged once one drop that fell:
     Not one to life reluctant said
         Farewell.


     V

     Strange love they have given you, love disloyal,
         Who mock with praise your name,
     To leave a head so rare and royal
         Too low for praise or blame.

     You could not love nor hate, they tell us,
         You had nor sense nor sting:
     In God's name, then, what plague befell us
         To fight for such a thing?

     "Some faults the gods will give," to fetter
         Man's highest intent:
     But surely you were something better
         Than innocent!

     No maid that strays with steps unwary
         Through snares unseen,
     But one to live and die for; Mary,
         The Queen.


     VI

     Forgive them all their praise, who blot
         Your fame with praise of you:
     Then love may say, and falter not,
         Adieu.

     Yet some you hardly would forgive
         Who did you much less wrong
     Once: but resentment should not live
         Too long.

     They never saw your lip's bright bow,
         Your swordbright eyes,
     The bluest of heavenly things below
         The skies.

     Clear eyes that love's self finds most like
         A swordblade's blue,
     A swordblade's ever keen to strike,
         Adieu.


     VII

     Though all things breathe or sound of fight
         That yet make up your spell,
     To bid you were to bid the light
         Farewell.

     Farewell the song says only, being
         A star whose race is run:
     Farewell the soul says never, seeing
         The sun.

     Yet, wellnigh as with flash of tears,
         The song must say but so
     That took your praise up twenty years
         Ago.

     More bright than stars or moons that vary,
         Sun kindling heaven and hell,
     Here, after all these years, Queen Mary,
         Farewell.




     HERSE


     When grace is given us ever to behold
         A child some sweet months old,
     Love, laying across our lips his finger, saith,
         Smiling, with bated breath,
     Hush! for the holiest thing that lives is here,
         And heaven's own heart how near!
     How dare we, that may gaze not on the sun,
         Gaze on this verier one?
     Heart, hold thy peace; eyes, be cast down for shame;
         Lips, breathe not yet its name.
     In heaven they know what name to call it; we,
         How should we know? For, see!
     The adorable sweet living marvellous
         Strange light that lightens us
     Who gaze, desertless of such glorious grace,
         Full in a babe's warm face!
     All roses that the morning rears are nought,
         All stars not worth a thought,
     Set this one star against them, or suppose
         As rival this one rose.
     What price could pay with earth's whole weight of gold
         One least flushed roseleaf's fold
     Of all this dimpling store of smiles that shine
         From each warm curve and line,
     Each charm of flower-sweet flesh, to reillume
         The dappled rose-red bloom
     Of all its dainty body, honey-sweet
         Clenched hands and curled-up feet,
     That on the roses of the dawn have trod
         As they came down from God,
     And keep the flush and colour that the sky
         Takes when the sun comes nigh,
     And keep the likeness of the smile their grace
         Evoked on God's own face
     When, seeing this work of his most heavenly mood,
         He saw that it was good?
     For all its warm sweet body seems one smile,
         And mere men's love too vile
     To meet it, or with eyes that worship dims
         Read o'er the little limbs,
     Read all the book of all their beauties o'er,
         Rejoice, revere, adore,
     Bow down and worship each delight in turn,
         Laugh, wonder, yield, and yearn.
     But when our trembling kisses dare, yet dread,
         Even to draw nigh its head,
     And touch, and scarce with touch or breath surprise
         Its mild miraculous eyes
     Out of their viewless vision--O, what then,
         What may be said of men?
     What speech may name a new-born child? what word
         Earth ever spake or heard?
     The best men's tongue that ever glory knew
         Called that a drop of dew
     Which from the breathing creature's kindly womb
         Came forth in blameless bloom.
     We have no word, as had those men most high,
         To call a baby by.
     Rose, ruby, lily, pearl of stormless seas--
         A better word than these,
     A better sign it was than flower or gem
         That love revealed to them:
     They knew that whence comes light or quickening flame,
         Thence only this thing came,
     And only might be likened of our love
         To somewhat born above,
     Not even to sweetest things dropped else on earth,
         Only to dew's own birth.
     Nor doubt we but their sense was heavenly true,
         Babe, when we gaze on you,
     A dew-drop out of heaven whose colours are
         More bright than sun or star,
     As now, ere watching love dare fear or hope,
         Lips, hands, and eyelids ope,
     And all your life is mixed with earthly leaven.
         O child, what news from heaven?




     TWINS

     AFFECTIONATELY INSCRIBED TO W. M. R. AND L. R.


     April, on whose wings
     Ride all gracious things,
     Like the star that brings
       All things good to man,
     Ere his light, that yet
     Makes the month shine, set,
     And fair May forget
       Whence her birth began,

     Brings, as heart would choose,
     Sound of golden news,
     Bright as kindling dews
       When the dawn begins;
     Tidings clear as mirth,
     Sweet as air and earth
     Now that hail the birth,
       Twice thus blest, of twins.

     In the lovely land
     Where with hand in hand
     Lovers wedded stand
       Other joys before
     Made your mixed life sweet:
     Now, as Time sees meet,
     Three glad blossoms greet
       Two glad blossoms more.

     Fed with sun and dew,
     While your joys were new,
     First arose and grew
       One bright olive-shoot:
     Then a fair and fine
     Slip of warm-haired pine
     Felt the sweet sun shine
       On its leaf and fruit.

     And it wore for mark
     Graven on the dark
     Beauty of its bark
       That the noblest name
     Worn in song of old
     By the king whose bold
     Hand had fast in hold
       All the flower of fame.

     Then, with southern skies
     Flattered in her eyes,
     Which, in lovelier wise
       Yet, reflect their blue
     Brightened more, being bright
     Here with life's delight,
     And with love's live light
       Glorified anew,

     Came, as fair as came
     One who bore her name
     (She that broke as flame
       From the swan-shell white),
     Crowned with tender hair
     Only, but more fair
     Than all queens that were
       Themes of oldworld fight,

     Of your flowers the third
     Bud, or new-fledged bird
     In your hearts' nest heard
       Murmuring like a dove
     Bright as those that drew
     Over waves where blew
     No loud wind the blue
       Heaven-hued car of love.

     Not the glorious grace
     Even of that one face
     Potent to displace
       All the towers of Troy
     Surely shone more clear
     Once with childlike cheer
     Than this child's face here
       Now with living joy.

     After these again
     Here in April's train
     Breaks the bloom of twain
       Blossoms in one birth
     For a crown of May
     On the front of day
     When he takes his way
       Over heaven and earth.

     Half a heavenly thing
     Given from heaven to Spring
     By the sun her king,
       Half a tender toy,
     Seems a child of curl
     Yet too soft to twirl;
     Seems the flower-sweet girl
       By the flower-bright boy.

     All the kind gods' grace,
     All their love, embrace
     Ever either face,
       Ever brood above them:
     All soft wings of hours
     Screen them as with flowers
     From all beams and showers:
       All life's seasons love them.

     When the dews of sleep
     Falling lightliest keep
     Eyes too close to peep
       Forth and laugh off rest,
     Joy from face to feet
     Fill them, as is meet:
     Life to them be sweet
       As their mother's breast.

     When those dews are dry,
     And in day's bright eye
     Looking full they lie
       Bright as rose and pearl,
     All returns of joy
     Pure of time's alloy
     Bless the rose-red boy,
       Guard the rose-white girl.


     POSTSCRIPT

     Friends, if I could take
     Half a note from Blake
     Or but one verse make
       Of the Conqueror's mine,
     Better than my best
     Song above your nest
     I would sing: the quest
       Now seems too divine.

     _April 28, 1881._




     THE SALT OF THE EARTH


     If childhood were not in the world,
       But only men and women grown;
     No baby-locks in tendrils curled,
       No baby-blossoms blown;

     Though men were stronger, women fairer,
       And nearer all delights in reach,
     And verse and music uttered rarer
       Tones of more godlike speech;

     Though the utmost life of life's best hours
       Found, as it cannot now find, words;
     Though desert sands were sweet as flowers
       And flowers could sing like birds,

     But children never heard them, never
       They felt a child's foot leap and run
     This were a drearier star than ever
       Yet looked upon the sun.




     SEVEN YEARS OLD


     I

     Seven white roses on one tree,
       Seven white loaves of blameless leaven,
     Seven white sails on one soft sea,
     Seven white swans on one lake's lee,
       Seven white flowerlike stars in heaven,
     All are types unmeet to be
       For a birthday's crown of seven.


     II

     Not the radiance of the roses,
       Not the blessing of the bread,
     Not the breeze that ere day grows is
     Fresh for sails and swans, and closes
       Wings above the sun's grave spread,
     When the starshine on the snows is
       Sweet as sleep on sorrow shed.


     III

     Nothing sweetest, nothing best,
       Holds so good and sweet a treasure
     As the love wherewith once blest
     Joy grows holy, grief takes rest,
       Life, half tired with hours to measure,
     Fills his eyes and lips and breast
       With most light and breath of pleasure;

     IV

     As the rapture unpolluted,
        As the passion undefiled,
     By whose force all pains heart-rooted
     Are transfigured and transmuted,
       Recompensed and reconciled,
     Through the imperial, undisputed,
       Present godhead of a child.


     V

     Brown bright eyes and fair bright head,
       Worth a worthier crown than this is,
     Worth a worthier song instead,
     Sweet grave wise round mouth, full fed
       With the joy of love, whose bliss is
     More than mortal wine and bread,
       Lips whose words are sweet as kisses,


     VI

     Little hands so glad of giving,
       Little heart so glad of love,
     Little soul so glad of living,
     While the strong swift hours are weaving
       Light with darkness woven above,
     Time for mirth and time for grieving,
       Plume of raven and plume of dove,


     VII

     I can give you but a word
       Warm with love therein for leaven,
     But a song that falls unheard
     Yet on ears of sense unstirred
       Yet by song so far from heaven,
     Whence you came the brightest bird,
       Seven years since, of seven times seven.




     EIGHT YEARS OLD


     I

     Sun, whom the faltering snow-cloud fears,
       Rise, let the time of year be May,
     Speak now the word that April hears,
       Let March have all his royal way;
     Bid all spring raise in winter's ears
       All tunes her children hear or play,
     Because the crown of eight glad years
       On one bright head is set to-day.


     II

     What matters cloud or sun to-day
       To him who wears the wreath of years
     So many, and all like flowers at play
       With wind and sunshine, while his ears
     Hear only song on every way?
       More sweet than spring triumphant hears
     Ring through the revel-rout of May
       Are these, the notes that winter fears.


     III

     Strong-hearted winter knows and fears
       The music made of love at play,
     Or haply loves the tune he hears
       From hearts fulfilled with flowering May,
     Whose molten music thaws his ears
       Late frozen, deaf but yesterday
     To sounds of dying and dawning years,
       Now quickened on his deathward way.


     IV

     For deathward now lies winter's way
       Down the green vestibule of years
     That each year brightens day by day
       With flower and shower till hope scarce fears
     And fear grows wholly hope of May.
       But we--the music in our ears
     Made of love's pulses as they play
       The heart alone that makes it hears.


     V

     The heart it is that plays and hears
       High salutation of to-day.
     Tongue falters, hand shrinks back, song fears
       Its own unworthiness to play
     Fit music for those eight sweet years,
       Or sing their blithe accomplished way.
     No song quite worth a young child's ears
       Broke ever even from birds in May.


     VI

     There beats not in the heart of May,
       When summer hopes and springtide fears,
     There falls not from the height of day,
       When sunlight speaks and silence hears,
     So sweet a psalm as children play
       And sing, each hour of all their years,
     Each moment of their lovely way,
       And know not how it thrills our ears.


     VII

     Ah child, what are we, that our ears
       Should hear you singing on your way,
     Should have this happiness? The years
       Whose hurrying wings about us play
     Are not like yours, whose flower-time fears
       Nought worse than sunlit showers in May,
     Being sinless as the spring, that hears
       Her own heart praise her every day.


     VIII

     Yet we too triumph in the day
       That bare, to entrance our eyes and ears,
     To lighten daylight, and to play
       Such notes as darkness knows and fears,
     The child whose face illumes our way,
       Whose voice lifts up the heart that hears,
     Whose hand is as the hand of May
       To bring us flowers from eight full years.

     _February 4, 1882._




     COMPARISONS


     Child, when they say that others
       Have been or are like you,
     Babes fit to be your brothers,
       Sweet human drops of dew,
     Bright fruit of mortal mothers,
       What should one say or do?

     We know the thought is treason,
       We feel the dream absurd;
     A claim rebuked of reason,
       That withers at a word:
     For never shone the season
       That bore so blithe a bird.

     Some smiles may seem as merry,
        Some glances gleam as wise,
     From lips as like a cherry
       And scarce less gracious eyes;
     Eyes browner than a berry,
       Lips red as morning's rise.

     But never yet rang laughter
       So sweet in gladdened ears
     Through wall and floor and rafter
       As all this household hears
     And rings response thereafter
       Till cloudiest weather clears.

     When those your chosen of all men,
       Whose honey never cloys,
     Two lights whose smiles enthrall men,
       Were called at your age boys,
     Those mighty men, while small men,
       Could make no merrier noise.

     Our Shakespeare, surely, daffed not
       More lightly pain aside
     From radiant lips that quaffed not
       Of forethought's tragic tide:
     Our Dickens, doubtless, laughed not
       More loud with life's first pride.

     The dawn were not more cheerless
       With neither light nor dew
     Than we without the fearless
       Clear laugh that thrills us through:
     If ever child stood peerless,
       Love knows that child is you.




     WHAT IS DEATH?


     Looking on a page where stood
     Graven of old on old-world wood
     Death, and by the grave's edge grim,
     Pale, the young man facing him,
     Asked my well-beloved of me
     Once what strange thing; this might be,
          Gaunt and great of limb.

     Death, I told him: and, surprise
     Deepening more his wildwood eyes
     (Like some sweet fleet thing's whose breath
     Speaks all spring though nought it saith),
     Up he turned his rosebright face
     Glorious with its seven years' grace,
           Asking--What is death?




     A CHILD'S PITY


     No sweeter thing than children's ways and wiles,
       Surely, we say, can gladden eyes and ears:
     Yet sometime sweeter than their words or smiles
       Are even their tears.

     To one for once a piteous tale was read,
       How, when the murderous mother crocodile
     Was slain, her fierce brood famished, and lay dead,
       Starved, by the Nile.

     In vast green reed-beds on the vast grey slime
       Those monsters motherless and helpless lay,
     Perishing only for the parent's crime
       Whose seed were they.

     Hours after, toward the dusk, our blithe small bird
       Of Paradise, who has our hearts in keeping,
     Was heard or seen, but hardly seen or heard,
       For pity weeping.

     He was so sorry, sitting still apart,
       For the poor little crocodiles, he said.
     Six years had given him, for an angel's heart,
       A child's instead.

     Feigned tears the false beasts shed for murderous ends,
       We know from travellers' tales of crocodiles:
     But these tears wept upon them of my friend's
       Outshine his smiles.

     What heavenliest angels of what heavenly city
       Could match the heavenly heart in children here?
     The heart that hallowing all things with its pity
       Casts out all fear?

     So lovely, so divine, so dear their laughter
       Seems to us, we know not what could be more dear:
     But lovelier yet we see the sign thereafter
       Of such a tear.

     With sense of love half laughing and half weeping
       We met your tears, our small sweet-spirited friend:
     Let your love have us in its heavenly keeping
       To life's last end.




     A CHILD'S LAUGHTER


     All the bells of heaven may ring,
     All the birds of heaven may sing,
     All the wells on earth may spring,
     All the winds on earth may bring
       All sweet sounds together;
     Sweeter far than all things heard,
     Hand of harper, tone of bird,
     Sound of woods at sundawn stirred,
     Welling water's winsome word,
       Wind in warm wan weather,

     One thing yet there is, that none
     Hearing ere its chime be done
     Knows not well the sweetest one
     Heard of man beneath the sun,
       Hoped in heaven hereafter;
     Soft and strong and loud and light,
     Very sound of very light
     Heard from morning's rosiest height,
     When the soul of all delight
       Fills a child's clear laughter.

     Golden bells of welcome rolled
     Never forth such notes, nor told
     Hours so blithe in tones so bold,
     As the radiant mouth of gold
       Here that rings forth heaven.
     If the golden-crested wren
     Were a nightingale--why, then,
     Something seen and heard of men
     Might be half as sweet as when
       Laughs a child of seven.




     A CHILD'S THANKS


     How low soe'er men rank us,
       How high soe'er we win,
     The children far above us
     Dwell, and they deign to love us,
     With lovelier love than ours,
     And smiles more sweet than flowers;
     As though the sun should thank us
       For letting light come in.

     With too divine complaisance,
       Whose grace misleads them thus,
     Being gods, in heavenly blindness
     They call our worship kindness,
     Our pebble-gift a gem:
     They think us good to them,
     Whose glance, whose breath, whose presence,
       Are gifts too good for us.

     The poet high and hoary
       Of meres that mountains bind
     Felt his great heart more often
     Yearn, and its proud strength soften
     From stern to tenderer mood,
     At thought of gratitude
     Shown than of song or story
       He heard of hearts unkind.

     But with what words for token
       And what adoring tears
     Of reverence risen to passion,
     In what glad prostrate fashion
     Of spirit and soul subdued,
     May man show gratitude
     For thanks of children spoken
       That hover in his ears?

     The angels laugh, your brothers,
       Child, hearing you thank me,
     With eyes whence night grows sunny,
     And touch of lips like honey,
     And words like honey-dew:
     But how shall I thank you?
     For gifts above all others
       What guerdon-gift may be?

     What wealth of words caressing,
       What choice of songs found best,
     Would seem not as derision,
     Found vain beside the vision
     And glory from above
     Shown in a child's heart's love?
     His part in life is blessing;
       Ours, only to be blest.




     A CHILD'S BATTLES

     +pyx aretan heurôn+.--PINDAR.


     Praise of the knights of old
     May sleep: their tale is told,
         And no man cares:
     The praise which fires our lips is
     A knight's whose fame eclipses
           All of theirs.

     The ruddiest light in heaven
     Blazed as his birth-star seven
         Long years ago:
     All glory crown that old year
     Which brought our stout small soldier
           With the snow!

     Each baby born has one
     Star, for his friends a sun,
         The first of stars:
     And we, the more we scan it,
     The more grow sure your planet,
           Child, was Mars.

     For each one flower, perchance,
     Blooms as his cognizance:
         The snowdrop chill,
     The violet unbeholden,
     For some: for you the golden
           Daffodil.

     Erect, a fighting flower,
     It breasts the breeziest hour
         That ever blew.
     And bent or broke things brittle
     Or frail, unlike a little
           Knight like you.

     Its flower is firm and fresh
     And stout like sturdiest flesh
         Of children: all
     The strenuous blast that parches
     Spring hurts it not till March is
            Near his fall.

     If winds that prate and fret
     Remark, rebuke, regret,
         Lament, or blame
     The brave plant's martial passion,
     It keeps its own free fashion
           All the same.

     We that would fain seem wise
     Assume grave mouths and eyes
         Whose looks reprove
     Too much delight in battle:
     But your great heart our prattle
           Cannot move.

     We say, small children should
     Be placid, mildly good
         And blandly meek:
     Whereat the broad smile rushes
     Full on your lips, and flushes
           All your cheek.

     If all the stars that are
     Laughed out, and every star
         Could here be heard,
     Such peals of golden laughter
     We should not hear, as after
           Such a word.

     For all the storm saith, still,
     Stout stands the daffodil:
         For all we say,
     Howe'er he look demurely,
     Our martialist will surely
           Have his way.

     We may not bind with bands
     Those large and liberal hands,
         Nor stay from fight,
     Nor hold them back from giving:
     No lean mean laws of living
           Bind a knight.

     And always here of old
     Such gentle hearts and bold
         Our land has bred:
     How durst her eye rest else on
     The glory shed from Nelson
           Quick and dead?

     Shame were it, if but one
     Such once were born her son,
         That one to have borne,
     And brought him ne'er a brother:
     His praise should bring his mother
           Shame and scorn.

     A child high-souled as he
     Whose manhood shook the sea
         Smiles haply here:
     His face, where love lies basking,
     With bright shut mouth seems asking,
           What is fear?

     The sunshine-coloured fists
     Beyond his dimpling wrists
         Were never closed
     For saving or for sparing--
     For only deeds of daring
           Predisposed.

     Unclenched, the gracious hands
     Let slip their gifts like sands
         Made rich with ore
     That tongues of beggars ravish
     From small stout hands so lavish
           Of their store.

     Sweet hardy kindly hands
     Like these were his that stands
         With heel on gorge
     Seen trampling down the dragon
     On sign or flask or flagon,
           Sweet Saint George.

     Some tournament, perchance,
     Of hands that couch no lance,
         Might mark this spot
     Your lists, if here some pleasant
     Small Guenevere were present,
           Launcelot.

     My brave bright flower, you need
     No foolish song, nor heed
         It more than spring
     The sighs of winter stricken
     Dead when your haunts requicken
           Here, my king.

     Yet O, how hardly may
     The wheels of singing stay
         That whirl along
     Bright paths whence echo raises
     The phantom of your praises,
           Child, my song!

     Beyond all other things
     That give my words fleet wings,
         Fleet wings and strong,
     You set their jesses ringing
     Till hardly can I, singing,
           Stint my song.

     But all things better, friend,
     And worse must find an end:
         And, right or wrong,
     'Tis time, lest rhyme should baffle,
     I doubt, to put a snaffle
           On my song.

     And never may your ear
     Aught harsher hear or fear,
         Nor wolfish night
     Nor dog-toothed winter snarling
     Behind your steps, my darling
           My delight!

     For all the gifts you give
     Me, dear, each day you live,
         Of thanks above
     All thanks that could be spoken
     Take not my song in token,
           Take my love.




     A CHILD'S FUTURE


     What will it please you, my darling, hereafter to be?
     Fame upon land will you look for, or glory by sea?
     Gallant your life will be always, and all of it free.

     Free as the wind when the heart of the twilight is stirred
     Eastward, and sounds from the springs of the sunrise are heard:
     Free--and we know not another as infinite word.

     Darkness or twilight or sunlight may compass us round,
     Hate may arise up against us, or hope may confound;
     Love may forsake us; yet may not the spirit be bound.

     Free in oppression of grief as in ardour of joy
     Still may the soul be, and each to her strength as a toy:
     Free in the glance of the man as the smile of the boy.

     Freedom alone is the salt and the spirit that gives
     Life, and without her is nothing that verily lives:
     Death cannot slay her: she laughs upon death and forgives.

     Brightest and hardiest of roses anear and afar
     Glitters the blithe little face of you, round as a star:
     Liberty bless you and keep you to be as you are.

     England and liberty bless you and keep you to be
     Worthy the name of their child and the sight of their sea:
     Fear not at all; for a slave, if he fears not, is free.




     SUNRISE


     If the wind and the sunlight of April and August had mingled the
           past and hereafter
     In a single adorable season whose life were a rapture of love and
           of laughter,
     And the blithest of singers were back with a song; if again from
           his tomb as from prison,
     If again from the night or the twilight of ages Aristophanes had
           arisen,
     With the gold-feathered wings of a bird that were also a god upon
           earth at his shoulders,
     And the gold-flowing laugh of the manhood of old at his lips, for a
           joy to beholders,
     He alone unrebuked of presumption were able to set to some adequate
           measure
     The delight of our eyes in the dawn that restores them the sun of
           their sense and the pleasure.
     For the days of the darkness of spirit are over for all of us here,
           and the season
     When desire was a longing, and absence a thorn, and rejoicing a
           word without reason.
     For the roof overhead of the pines is astir with delight as of
           jubilant voices,
     And the floor underfoot of the bracken and heather alive as a heart
           that rejoices.
     For the house that was childless awhile, and the light of it
           darkened, the pulse of it dwindled,
     Rings radiant again with a child's bright feet, with the light of
           his face is rekindled.
     And the ways of the meadows that knew him, the sweep of the down
           that the sky's belt closes,
     Grow gladder at heart than the soft wind made them whose feet were
           but fragrant with roses,
     Though the fall of the year be upon us, who trusted in June and by
           June were defrauded,
     And the summer that brought us not back the desire of our eyes be
           gone hence unapplauded.
     For July came joyless among us, and August went out from us arid
           and sterile,
     And the hope of our hearts, as it seemed, was no more than a flower
           that the seasons imperil,
     And the joy of our hearts, as it seemed, than a thought which
           regret had not heart to remember,
     Till four dark months overpast were atoned for, and summer began in
           September.
     Hark, April again as a bird in the house with a child's voice
           hither and thither:
     See, May in the garden again with a child's face cheering the woods
           ere they wither.
     June laughs in the light of his eyes, and July on the sunbright
           cheeks of him slumbers,
     And August glows in a smile more sweet than the cadence of
           gold-mouthed numbers.
     In the morning the sight of him brightens the sun, and the noon
           with delight in him flushes,
     And the silence of nightfall is music about him as soft as the
           sleep that it hushes.
     We awake with a sense of a sunrise that is not a gift of the
           sundawn's giving,
     And a voice that salutes us is sweeter than all sounds else in the
           world of the living,
     And a presence that warms us is brighter than all in the world of
           our visions beholden,
     Though the dreams of our sleep were as those that the light of a
           world without grief makes golden.
     For the best that the best of us ever devised as a likeness of
           heaven and its glory,
     What was it of old, or what is it and will be for ever, in song or
           in story,
     Or in shape or in colour of carven or painted resemblance, adored
           of all ages,
     But a vision recorded of children alive in the pictures of old or
           the pages?
     Where children are not, heaven is not, and heaven if they come not
           again shall be never:
     But the face and the voice of a child are assurance of heaven and
           its promise for ever.






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Studies in Song, A Century of
Roundels, Sonnets on English Dramatic Poets, The Heptalogia, Etc, by Algernon Charles Swinburne

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK STUDIES IN SONG ***

***** This file should be named 18782-8.txt or 18782-8.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/1/8/7/8/18782/

Produced by Paul Murray, Lisa Reigel, and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


﻿The Project Gutenberg EBook of Songs of the Springtides and Birthday Ode, by 
Algernon Charles Swinburne

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Songs of the Springtides and Birthday Ode
       Taken from The Collected Poetical Works of Algernon Charles
       Swinburne--Vol. III

Author: Algernon Charles Swinburne

Release Date: April 30, 2006 [EBook #18287]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SONGS OF THE SPRINGTIDES ***




Produced by Paul Murray, Diane Monico, and the Project
Gutenberg Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net.









SONGS OF THE SPRINGTIDES

BIRTHDAY ODE

Taken from
THE COLLECTED POETICAL WORKS
OF ALGERNON CHARLES SWINBURNE,
VOL. III

By

Algernon Charles Swinburne




SWINBURNE'S POETICAL WORKS

I.   POEMS AND BALLADS (First Series).

II.  SONGS BEFORE SUNRISE, AND SONGS OF TWO NATIONS.

III. POEMS AND BALLADS (Second and Third
       Series), and SONGS OF THE SPRINGTIDES.

IV.  TRISTRAM OF LYONESSE, THE TALE OF BALEN,
       ATALANTA IN CALYDON, ERECHTHEUS.

V.   STUDIES IN SONG, A CENTURY OF ROUNDELS, SONNETS
       ON ENGLISH DRAMATIC POETS, THE HEPTALOGIA, ETC.

VI.  A MIDSUMMER HOLIDAY, ASTROPHEL, A CHANNEL PASSAGE
       AND OTHER POEMS.

LONDON: WILLIAM HEINEMANN




SONGS OF THE SPRINGTIDES

BIRTHDAY ODE

By

Algernon Charles Swinburne

1917

LONDON: WILLIAM HEINEMANN




_First printed (Chatto), 1904_

_Reprinted 1904, '09, '10, '12_

_(Heinemann), 1917_

_London: William Heinemann, 1917_




SONGS OF THE SPRINGTIDES


TO EDWARD JOHN TRELAWNY      293

THALASSIUS                   295

ON THE CLIFFS                311

THE GARDEN OF CYMODOCE       326

BIRTHDAY ODE                 341

NOTES                        359




SONGS OF THE SPRINGTIDES




DEDICATION

TO EDWARD JOHN TRELAWNY


_A sea-mew on a sea-king's wrist alighting,
  As the north sea-wind caught and strained and curled
The raven-figured flag that led men fighting
  From field to green field of the water-world,
Might find such brief high favour at his hand
  For wings imbrued with brine, with foam impearled,
As these my songs require at yours on land,
  That durst not save for love's free sake require,
Being lightly born between the foam and sand,
  But reared by hope and memory and desire
Of lives that were and life that is to be,
  Even such as filled his heavenlier song with fire
Whose very voice, that sang to set man free,
  Was in your ears as ever in ours his lyre,
Once, ere the flame received him from the sea._




THALASSIUS


Upon the flowery forefront of the year,
One wandering by the grey-green April sea
Found on a reach of shingle and shallower sand
Inlaid with starrier glimmering jewellery
Left for the sun's love and the light wind's cheer
Along the foam-flowered strand
Breeze-brightened, something nearer sea than land
Though the last shoreward blossom-fringe was near,
A babe asleep with flower-soft face that gleamed
To sun and seaward as it laughed and dreamed,
Too sure of either love for either's fear,
Albeit so birdlike slight and light, it seemed
Nor man nor mortal child of man, but fair
As even its twin-born tenderer spray-flowers were,
That the wind scatters like an Oread's hair.

  For when July strewed fire on earth and sea
The last time ere that year,
Out of the flame of morn Cymothoe
Beheld one brighter than the sunbright sphere
Move toward her from its fieriest heart, whence trod
The live sun's very God,
Across the foam-bright water-ways that are
As heavenlier heavens with star for answering star,
And on her eyes and hair and maiden mouth
Felt a kiss falling fierier than the South
And heard above afar
A noise of songs and wind-enamoured wings
And lutes and lyres of milder and mightier strings,
And round the resonant radiance of his car
Where depth is one with height,
Light heard as music, music seen as light.
And with that second moondawn of the spring's
That fosters the first rose,
A sun-child whiter than the sunlit snows
Was born out of the world of sunless things
That round the round earth flows and ebbs and flows.

  But he that found the sea-flower by the sea
And took to foster like a graft of earth
Was born of man's most highest and heavenliest birth,
Free-born as winds and stars and waves are free;
A warrior grey with glories more than years,
Though more of years than change the quick to dead
Had rained their light and darkness on his head;
A singer that in time's and memory's ears
Should leave such words to sing as all his peers
Might praise with hallowing heat of rapturous tears
Till all the days of human flight were fled.
And at his knees his fosterling was fed
Not with man's wine and bread
Nor mortal mother-milk of hopes and fears,
But food of deep memorial days long sped;
For bread with wisdom and with song for wine
Clear as the full calm's emerald hyaline.
And from his grave glad lips the boy would gather
Fine honey of song-notes goldener than gold,
More sweet than bees make of the breathing heather,
That he, as glad and bold,
Might drink as they, and keep his spirit from cold.
And the boy loved his laurel-laden hair
As his own father's risen on the eastern air,
And that less white brow-binding bayleaf bloom
More than all flowers his father's eyes relume;
And those high songs he heard,
More than all notes of any landward bird,
More than all sounds less free
Than the wind's quiring to the choral sea.

  High things the high song taught him; how the breath
Too frail for life may be more strong than death;
And this poor flash of sense in life, that gleams
As a ghost's glory in dreams,
More stabile than the world's own heart's root seems,
By that strong faith of lordliest love which gives
To death's own sightless-seeming eyes a light
Clearer, to death's bare bones a verier might,
Than shines or strikes from any man that lives.
How he that loves life overmuch shall die
The dog's death, utterly:
And he that much less loves it than he hates
All wrongdoing that is done
Anywhere always underneath the sun
Shall live a mightier life than time's or fate's.
One fairer thing he shewed him, and in might
More strong than day and night
Whose strengths build up time's towering period:
Yea, one thing stronger and more high than God,
Which if man had not, then should God not be:
And that was Liberty.
And gladly should man die to gain, he said,
Freedom; and gladlier, having lost, lie dead.
For man's earth was not, nor the sweet sea-waves
His, nor his own land, nor its very graves,
Except they bred not, bore not, hid not slaves:
But all of all that is,
Were one man free in body and soul, were his.

  And the song softened, even as heaven by night
Softens, from sunnier down to starrier light,
And with its moonbright breath
Blessed life for death's sake, and for life's sake death.
Till as the moon's own beam and breath confuse
In one clear hueless haze of glimmering hues
The sea's line and the land's line and the sky's,
And light for love of darkness almost dies,
As darkness only lives for light's dear love,
Whose hands the web of night is woven of,
So in that heaven of wondrous words were life
And death brought out of strife;
Yea, by that strong spell of serene increase
Brought out of strife to peace.

  And the song lightened, as the wind at morn
Flashes, and even with lightning of the wind
Night's thick-spun web is thinned
And all its weft unwoven and overworn
Shrinks, as might love from scorn.
And as when wind and light on water and land
Leap as twin gods from heavenward hand in hand,
And with the sound and splendour of their leap
Strike darkness dead, and daunt the spirit of sleep,
And burn it up with fire;
So with the light that lightened from the lyre
Was all the bright heat in the child's heart stirred
And blown with blasts of music into flame
Till even his sense became
Fire, as the sense that fires the singing bird
Whose song calls night by name.
And in the soul within the sense began
The manlike passion of a godlike man,
And in the sense within the soul again
Thoughts that make men of gods and gods of men.

  For love the high song taught him: love that turns
God's heart toward man as man's to Godward; love
That life and death and life are fashioned of,
From the first breath that burns
Half kindled on the flowerlike yeanling's lip,
So light and faint that life seems like to slip,
To that yet weaklier drawn
When sunset dies of night's devouring dawn.
But the man dying not wholly as all men dies
If aught be left of his in live men's eyes
Out of the dawnless dark of death to rise;
If aught of deed or word
Be seen for all time or of all time heard.
Love, that though body and soul were overthrown
Should live for love's sake of itself alone,
Though spirit and flesh were one thing doomed and dead,
Not wholly annihilated.
Seeing even the hoariest ash-flake that the pyre
Drops, and forgets the thing was once afire
And gave its heart to feed the pile's full flame
Till its own heart its own heat overcame,
Outlives its own life, though by scarce a span,
As such men dying outlive themselves in man,
Outlive themselves for ever; if the heat
Outburn the heart that kindled it, the sweet
Outlast the flower whose soul it was, and flit
Forth of the body of it
Into some new shape of a strange perfume
More potent than its light live spirit of bloom,
How shall not something of that soul relive,
That only soul that had such gifts to give
As lighten something even of all men's doom
Even from the labouring womb
Even to the seal set on the unopening tomb?
And these the loving light of song and love
Shall wrap and lap round and impend above,
Imperishable; and all springs born illume
Their sleep with brighter thoughts than wake the dove
To music, when the hillside winds resume
The marriage-song of heather-flower and broom
And all the joy thereof.

  And hate the song too taught him: hate of all
That brings or holds in thrall
Of spirit or flesh, free-born ere God began,
The holy body and sacred soul of man.
And wheresoever a curse was or a chain,
A throne for torment or a crown for bane
Rose, moulded out of poor men's molten pain,
There, said he, should man's heaviest hate be set
Inexorably, to faint not or forget
Till the last warmth bled forth of the last vein
In flesh that none should call a king's again,
Seeing wolves and dogs and birds that plague-strike air
Leave the last bone of all the carrion bare.

  And hope the high song taught him: hope whose eyes
Can sound the seas unsoundable, the skies
Inaccessible of eyesight; that can see
What earth beholds not, hear what wind and sea
Hear not, and speak what all these crying in one
Can speak not to the sun.
For in her sovereign eyelight all things are
Clear as the closest seen and kindlier star
That marries morn and even and winter and spring
With one love's golden ring.
For she can see the days of man, the birth
Of good and death of evil things on earth
Inevitable and infinite, and sure
As present pain is, or herself is pure.
Yea, she can hear and see, beyond all things
That lighten from before Time's thunderous wings
Through the awful circle of wheel-winged periods,
The tempest of the twilight of all Gods:
And higher than all the circling course they ran
The sundawn of the spirit that was man.

  And fear the song too taught him; fear to be
Worthless the dear love of the wind and sea
That bred him fearless, like a sea-mew reared
In rocks of man's foot feared,
Where nought of wingless life may sing or shine.
Fear to wax worthless of that heaven he had
When all the life in all his limbs was glad
And all the drops in all his veins were wine
And all the pulses music; when his heart,
Singing, bade heaven and wind and sea bear part
In one live song's reiterance, and they bore:
Fear to go crownless of the flower he wore
When the winds loved him and the waters knew,
The blithest life that clove their blithe life through
With living limbs exultant, or held strife
More amorous than all dalliance aye anew
With the bright breath and strength of their large life,
With all strong wrath of all sheer winds that blew,
All glories of all storms of the air that fell
Prone, ineluctable,
With roar from heaven of revel, and with hue
As of a heaven turned hell.
For when the red blast of their breath had made
All heaven aflush with light more dire than shade,
He felt it in his blood and eyes and hair
Burn as if all the fires of the earth and air
Had laid strong hold upon his flesh, and stung
The soul behind it as with serpent's tongue,
Forked like the loveliest lightnings: nor could bear
But hardly, half distraught with strong delight,
The joy that like a garment wrapped him round
And lapped him over and under
With raiment of great light
And rapture of great sound
At every loud leap earthward of the thunder
From heaven's most furthest bound:
So seemed all heaven in hearing and in sight,
Alive and mad with glory and angry joy,
That something of its marvellous mirth and might
Moved even to madness, fledged as even for flight,
The blood and spirit of one but mortal boy.

  So, clothed with love and fear that love makes great,
And armed with hope and hate,
He set first foot upon the spring-flowered ways
That all feet pass and praise.
And one dim dawn between the winter and spring,
In the sharp harsh wind harrying heaven and earth
To put back April that had borne his birth
From sunward on her sunniest shower-struck wing,
With tears and laughter for the dew-dropt thing,
Slight as indeed a dew-drop, by the sea
One met him lovelier than all men may be,
God-featured, with god's eyes; and in their might
Somewhat that drew men's own to mar their sight,
Even of all eyes drawn toward him: and his mouth
Was as the very rose of all men's youth,
One rose of all the rose-beds in the world:
But round his brows the curls were snakes that curled,
And like his tongue a serpent's; and his voice
Speaks death, and bids rejoice.
Yet then he spake no word, seeming as dumb,
A dumb thing mild and hurtless; nor at first
From his bowed eyes seemed any light to come,
Nor his meek lips for blood or tears to thirst:
But as one blind and mute in mild sweet wise
Pleading for pity of piteous lips and eyes,
He strayed with faint bare lily-lovely feet
Helpless, and flowerlike sweet:
Nor might man see, not having word hereof,
That this of all gods was the great god Love.

  And seeing him lovely and like a little child
That wellnigh wept for wonder that it smiled
And was so feeble and fearful, with soft speech
The youth bespake him softly; but there fell
From the sweet lips no sweet word audible
That ear or thought might reach:
No sound to make the dim cold silence glad,
No breath to thaw the hard harsh air with heat;
Only the saddest smile of all things sweet,
Only the sweetest smile of all things sad.

  And so they went together one green way
Till April dying made free the world for May;
And on his guide suddenly Love's face turned,
And in his blind eyes burned
Hard light and heat of laughter; and like flame
That opens in a mountain's ravening mouth
To blear and sear the sunlight from the south,
His mute mouth opened, and his first word came:
'Knowest thou me now by name?'
And all his stature waxed immeasurable,
As of one shadowing heaven and lightening hell;
And statelier stood he than a tower that stands
And darkens with its darkness far-off sands
Whereon the sky leans red;
And with a voice that stilled the winds he said:
'I am he that was thy lord before thy birth,
I am he that is thy lord till thou turn earth:
I make the night more dark, and all the morrow
Dark as the night whose darkness was my breath:
O fool, my name is sorrow;
Thou fool, my name is death.'

  And he that heard spake not, and looked right on
Again, and Love was gone.

  Through many a night toward many a wearier day
His spirit bore his body down its way.
Through many a day toward many a wearier night
His soul sustained his sorrows in her sight.
And earth was bitter, and heaven, and even the sea
Sorrowful even as he.
And the wind helped not, and the sun was dumb;
And with too long strong stress of grief to be
His heart grew sere and numb.

  And one bright eve ere summer in autumn sank
At stardawn standing on a grey sea-bank
He felt the wind fitfully shift and heave
As toward a stormier eve;
And all the wan wide sea shuddered; and earth
Shook underfoot as toward some timeless birth,
Intolerable and inevitable; and all
Heaven, darkling, trembled like a stricken thrall.
And far out of the quivering east, and far
From past the moonrise and its guiding star,
Began a noise of tempest and a light
That was not of the lightning; and a sound
Rang with it round and round
That was not of the thunder; and a flight
As of blown clouds by night,
That was not of them; and with songs and cries
That sang and shrieked their soul out at the skies
A shapeless earthly storm of shapes began
From all ways round to move in on the man,
Clamorous against him silent; and their feet
Were as the wind's are fleet,
And their shrill songs were as wild birds' are sweet.

  And as when all the world of earth was wronged
And all the host of all men driven afoam
By the red hand of Rome,
Round some fierce amphitheatre overthronged
With fair clear faces full of bloodier lust
Than swells and stings the tiger when his mood
Is fieriest after blood
And drunk with trampling of the murderous must
That soaks and stains the tortuous close-coiled wood
Made monstrous with its myriad-mustering brood,
Face by fair face panted and gleamed and pressed,
And breast by passionate breast
Heaved hot with ravenous rapture, as they quaffed
The red ripe full fume of the deep live draught,
The sharp quick reek of keen fresh bloodshed, blown
Through the dense deep drift up to the emperor's throne
From the under steaming sands
With clamour of all-applausive throats and hands,
Mingling in mirthful time
With shrill blithe mockeries of the lithe-limbed mime:
So from somewhence far forth of the unbeholden,
Dreadfully driven from over and after and under,
Fierce, blown through fifes of brazen blast and golden,
With sound of chiming waves that drown the thunder
Or thunder that strikes dumb the sea's own chimes,
Began the bellowing of the bull-voiced mimes,
Terrible; firs bowed down as briars or palms
Even at the breathless blast as of a breeze
Fulfilled with clamour and clangour and storms of psalms;
Red hands rent up the roots of old-world trees,
Thick flames of torches tossed as tumbling seas
Made mad the moonless and infuriate air
That, ravening, revelled in the riotous hair
And raiment of the furred Bassarides.

  So came all those in on him; and his heart,
As out of sleep suddenly struck astart,
Danced, and his flesh took fire of theirs, and grief
Was as a last year's leaf
Blown dead far down the wind's way; and he set
His pale mouth to the brightest mouth it met
That laughed for love against his lips, and bade
Follow; and in following all his blood grew glad
And as again a sea-bird's; for the wind
Took him to bathe him deep round breast and brow
Not as it takes a dead leaf drained and thinned,
But as the brightest bay-flower blown on bough,
Set springing toward it singing: and they rode
By many a vine-leafed, many a rose-hung road,
Exalt with exultation; many a night
Set all its stars upon them as for spies
On many a moon-bewildering mountain-height
Where he rode only by the fierier light
Of his dread lady's hot sweet hungering eyes.
For the moon wandered witless of her way,
Spell-stricken by strong magic in such wise
As wizards use to set the stars astray.
And in his ears the music that makes mad
Beat always; and what way the music bade,
That alway rode he; nor was any sleep
His, nor from height nor deep.
But heaven was as red iron, slumberless,
And had no heart to bless;
And earth lay sere and darkling as distraught,
And help in her was nought.

  Then many a midnight, many a morn and even,
His mother, passing forth of her fair heaven,
With goodlier gifts than all save gods can give
From earth or from the heaven where sea-things live,
With shine of sea-flowers through the bay-leaf braid
Woven for a crown her foam-white hands had made
To crown him with land's laurel and sea-dew,
Sought the sea-bird that was her boy: but he
Sat panther-throned beside Erigone,
Riding the red ways of the revel through
Midmost of pale-mouthed passion's crownless crew.
Till on some winter's dawn of some dim year
He let the vine-bit on the panther's lip
Slide, and the green rein slip,
And set his eyes to seaward, nor gave ear
If sound from landward hailed him, dire or dear;
And passing forth of all those fair fierce ranks
Back to the grey sea-banks,
Against a sea-rock lying, aslant the steep,
Fell after many sleepless dreams on sleep.

  And in his sleep the dun green light was shed
Heavily round his head
That through the veil of sea falls fathom-deep,
Blurred like a lamp's that when the night drops dead
Dies; and his eyes gat grace of sleep to see
The deep divine dark dayshine of the sea,
Dense water-walls and clear dusk water-ways,
Broad-based, or branching as a sea-flower sprays
That side or this dividing; and anew
The glory of all her glories that he knew.
And in sharp rapture of recovering tears
He woke on fire with yearnings of old years,
Pure as one purged of pain that passion bore,
Ill child of bitter mother; for his own
Looked laughing toward him from her midsea throne,
Up toward him there ashore.

  Thence in his heart the great same joy began,
Of child that made him man:
And turned again from all hearts else on quest,
He communed with his own heart, and had rest.
And like sea-winds upon loud waters ran
His days and dreams together, till the joy
Burned in him of the boy.
Till the earth's great comfort and the sweet sea's breath
Breathed and blew life in where was heartless death,
Death spirit-stricken of soul-sick days, where strife
Of thought and flesh made mock of death and life.
And grace returned upon him of his birth
Where heaven was mixed with heavenlike sea and earth;
And song shot forth strong wings that took the sun
From inward, fledged with might of sorrow and mirth
And father's fire made mortal in his son.
Nor was not spirit of strength in blast and breeze
To exalt again the sun's child and the sea's;
For as wild mares in Thessaly grow great
With child of ravishing winds, that violate
Their leaping length of limb with manes like fire
And eyes outburning heaven's
With fires more violent than the lightning levin's
And breath drained out and desperate of desire,
Even so the spirit in him, when winds grew strong,
Grew great with child of song.
Nor less than when his veins first leapt for joy
To draw delight in such as burns a boy,
Now too the soul of all his senses felt
The passionate pride of deep sea-pulses dealt
Through nerve and jubilant vein
As from the love and largess of old time,
And with his heart again
The tidal throb of all the tides keep rhyme
And charm him from his own soul's separate sense
With infinite and invasive influence
That made strength sweet in him and sweetness strong,
Being now no more a singer, but a song.

  Till one clear day when brighter sea-wind blew
And louder sea-shine lightened, for the waves
Were full of godhead and the light that saves,
His father's, and their spirit had pierced him through,
He felt strange breath and light all round him shed
That bowed him down with rapture; and he knew
His father's hand, hallowing his humbled head,
And the old great voice of the old good time, that said:

  "Child of my sunlight and the sea, from birth
A fosterling and fugitive on earth;
Sleepless of soul as wind or wave or fire,
A manchild with an ungrown God's desire;
Because thou hast loved nought mortal more than me,
Thy father, and thy mother-hearted sea;
Because thou hast set thine heart to sing, and sold
Life and life's love for song, God's living gold;
Because thou hast given thy flower and fire of youth
To feed men's hearts with visions, truer than truth;
Because thou hast kept in those world-wandering eyes
The light that makes me music of the skies;
Because thou hast heard with world-unwearied ears
The music that puts light into the spheres;
Have therefore in thine heart and in thy mouth
The sound of song that mingles north and south,
The song of all the winds that sing of me,
And in thy soul the sense of all the sea."




ON THE CLIFFS

[Greek: imerophônos aêdôn.]

                        SAPPHO.


Between the moondawn and the sundown here
The twilight hangs half starless; half the sea
Still quivers as for love or pain or fear
Or pleasure mightier than these all may be
A man's live heart might beat
Wherein a God's with mortal blood should meet
And fill its pulse too full to bear the strain
With fear or love or pleasure's twin-born, pain.
Fiercely the gaunt woods to the grim soil cling
That bears for all fair fruits
Wan wild sparse flowers of windy and wintry spring
Between the tortive serpent-shapen roots
Wherethrough their dim growth hardly strikes and shoots
And shews one gracious thing
Hardly, to speak for summer one sweet word
Of summer's self scarce heard.
But higher the steep green sterile fields, thick-set
With flowerless hawthorn even to the upward verge
Whence the woods gathering watch new cliffs emerge
Higher than their highest of crowns that sea-winds fret,
Hold fast, for all that night or wind can say,
Some pale pure colour yet,
Too dim for green and luminous for grey.
Between the climbing inland cliffs above
And these beneath that breast and break the bay,
A barren peace too soft for hate or love
Broods on an hour too dim for night or day.

O wind, O wingless wind that walk'st the sea,
Weak wind, wing-broken, wearier wind than we,
Who are yet not spirit-broken, maimed like thee,
Who wail not in our inward night as thou
In the outer darkness now,
What word has the old sea given thee for mine ear
From thy faint lips to hear?
For some word would she send me, knowing not how.

Nay, what far other word
Than ever of her was spoken, or of me
Or all my winged white kinsfolk of the sea
Between fresh wave and wave was ever heard,
Cleaves the clear dark enwinding tree with tree
Too close for stars to separate and to see
Enmeshed in multitudinous unity?
What voice of what strong God hath stormed and stirred
The fortressed rock of silence, rent apart
Even to the core Night's all-maternal heart?
What voice of God grown heavenlier in a bird,
Made keener of edge to smite
Than lightning--yea, thou knowest, O mother Night,
Keen as that cry from thy strange children sent
Wherewith the Athenian judgment-shrine was rent,
For wrath that all their wrath was vainly spent,
Their wrath for wrong made right
By justice in her own divine despite
That bade pass forth unblamed
The sinless matricide and unashamed?
Yea, what new cry is this, what note more bright
Than their song's wing of words was dark of flight,
What word is this thou hast heard,
Thine and not thine or theirs, O Night, what word
More keen than lightning and more sweet than light?
As all men's hearts grew godlike in one bird
And all those hearts cried on thee, crying with might,
Hear us, O mother Night.

Dumb is the mouth of darkness as of death:
Light, sound and life are one
In the eyes and lips of dawn that draw the sun
To hear what first child's word with glimmering breath
Their weak wan weanling child the twilight saith;
But night makes answer none.

God, if thou be God,--bird, if bird thou be,--
Do thou then answer me.
For but one word, what wind soever blow,
Is blown up usward ever from the sea.
In fruitless years of youth dead long ago
And deep beneath their own dead leaves and snow
Buried, I heard with bitter heart and sere
The same sea's word unchangeable, nor knew
But that mine own life-days were changeless too
And sharp and salt with unshed tear on tear
And cold and fierce and barren; and my soul,
Sickening, swam weakly with bated breath
In a deep sea like death,
And felt the wind buffet her face with brine
Hard, and harsh thought on thought in long bleak roll
Blown by keen gusts of memory sad as thine
Heap the weight up of pain, and break, and leave
Strength scarce enough to grieve
In the sick heavy spirit, unmanned with strife
Of waves that beat at the tired lips of life.

Nay, sad may be man's memory, sad may be
The dream he weaves him as for shadow of thee,
But scarce one breathing-space, one heartbeat long,
Wilt thou take shadow of sadness on thy song.
Not thou, being more than man or man's desire,
Being bird and God in one,
With throat of gold and spirit of the sun;
The sun whom all our souls and songs call sire,
Whose godhead gave thee, chosen of all our quire,
Thee only of all that serve, of all that sing
Before our sire and king,
Borne up some space on time's world-wandering wing,
This gift, this doom, to bear till time's wing tire--
Life everlasting of eternal fire.

Thee only of all; yet can no memory say
How many a night and day
My heart has been as thy heart, and my life
As thy life is, a sleepless hidden thing,
Full of the thirst and hunger of winter and spring,
That seeks its food not in such love or strife
As fill men's hearts with passionate hours and rest.
From no loved lips and on no loving breast
Have I sought ever for such gifts as bring
Comfort, to stay the secret soul with sleep.
The joys, the loves, the labours, whence men reap
Rathe fruit of hopes and fears,
I have made not mine; the best of all my days
Have been as those fair fruitless summer strays,
Those water-waifs that but the sea-wind steers,
Flakes of glad foam or flowers on footless ways
That take the wind in season and the sun,
And when the wind wills is their season done.

For all my days as all thy days from birth
My heart as thy heart was in me as thee,
Fire; and not all the fountains of the sea
Have waves enough to quench it, nor on earth
Is fuel enough to feed,
While day sows night and night sows day for seed.

We were not marked for sorrow, thou nor I,
For joy nor sorrow, sister, were we made,
To take delight and grief to live and die,
Assuaged by pleasures or by pains affrayed
That melt men's hearts and alter; we retain
A memory mastering pleasure and all pain,
A spirit within the sense of ear and eye,
A soul behind the soul, that seeks and sings
And makes our life move only with its wings
And feed but from its lips, that in return
Feed of our hearts wherein the old fires that burn
Have strength not to consume
Nor glory enough to exalt us past our doom.

_Ah, ah, the doom_ (thou knowest whence rang that wail)
_Of the shrill nightingale!_
(From whose wild lips, thou knowest, that wail was thrown)
_For round about her have the great gods cast
A wing-borne body, and clothed her close and fast
With a sweet life that hath no part in moan.
But me, for me_ (how hadst thou heart to hear?)
_Remains a sundering with the two-edged spear._

_Ah, for her doom!_ so cried in presage then
The bodeful bondslave of the king of men,
And might not win her will.
Too close the entangling dragnet woven of crime,
The snare of ill new-born of elder ill,
The curse of new time for an elder time,
Had caught, and held her yet,
Enmeshed intolerably in the intolerant net,
Who thought with craft to mock the God most high,
And win by wiles his crown of prophecy
From the Sun's hand sublime,
As God were man, to spare or to forget.

But thou,--the gods have given thee and forgiven thee
More than our master gave
That strange-eyed spirit-wounded strange-tongued slave
There questing houndlike where the roofs red-wet
Reeked as a wet red grave.
Life everlasting has their strange grace given thee,
Even hers whom thou wast wont to sing and serve
With eyes, but not with song, too swift to swerve;
Yet might not even thine eyes estranged estrange her,
Who seeing thee too, but inly, burn and bleed
Like that pale princess-priest of Priam's seed,
For stranger service gave thee guerdon stranger;
If this indeed be guerdon, this indeed
Her mercy, this thy meed--
That thou, being more than all we born, being higher
Than all heads crowned of him that only gives
The light whereby man lives,
The bay that bids man moved of God's desire
Lay hand on lute or lyre,
Set lip to trumpet or deflowered green reed--
If this were given thee for a grace indeed,
That thou, being first of all these, thou alone
Shouldst have the grace to die not, but to live
And lose nor change one pulse of song, one tone
Of all that were thy lady's and thine own,
Thy lady's whom thou criedst on to forgive,
Thou, priest and sacrifice on the altar-stone
Where none may worship not of all that live,
Love's priestess, errant on dark ways diverse;
If this were grace indeed for Love to give,
If this indeed were blessing and no curse.

Love's priestess, mad with pain and joy of song,
Song's priestess, mad with joy and pain of love,
Name above all names that are lights above,
We have loved, praised, pitied, crowned and done thee wrong,
O thou past praise and pity; thou the sole
Utterly deathless, perfect only and whole
Immortal, body and soul.
For over all whom time hath overpast
The shadow of sleep inexorable is cast,
The implacable sweet shadow of perfect sleep
That gives not back what life gives death to keep;
Yea, all that lived and loved and sang and sinned
Are all borne down death's cold sweet soundless wind
That blows all night and knows not whom its breath,
Darkling, may touch to death:
But one that wind hath touched and changed not,--one
Whose body and soul are parcel of the sun;
One that earth's fire could burn not, nor the sea
Quench; nor might human doom take hold on thee;
All praise, all pity, all dreams have done thee wrong,
All love, with eyes love-blinded from above;
Song's priestess, mad with joy and pain of love,
Love's priestess, mad with pain and joy of song.

Hast thou none other answer then for me
Than the air may have of thee,
Or the earth's warm woodlands girdling with green girth
Thy secret sleepless burning life on earth,
Or even the sea that once, being woman crowned
And girt with fire and glory of anguish round,
Thou wert so fain to seek to, fain to crave
If she would hear thee and save
And give thee comfort of thy great green grave?
Because I have known thee always who thou art,
Thou knowest, have known thee to thy heart's own heart,
Nor ever have given light ear to storied song
That did thy sweet name sweet unwitting wrong,
Nor ever have called thee nor would call for shame,
Thou knowest, but inly by thine only name,
Sappho--because I have known thee and loved, hast thou
None other answer now?
As brother and sister were we, child and bird,
Since thy first Lesbian word
Flamed on me, and I knew not whence I knew
This was the song that struck my whole soul through,
Pierced my keen spirit of sense with edge more keen,
Even when I knew not,--even ere sooth was seen,--
When thou wast but the tawny sweet winged thing
Whose cry was but of spring.

And yet even so thine ear should hear me--yea,
Hear me this nightfall by this northland bay,
Even for their sake whose loud good word I had,
Singing of thee in the all-beloved clime
Once, where the windy wine of spring makes mad
Our sisters of Majano, who kept time
Clear to my choral rhyme.
Yet was the song acclaimed of these aloud
Whose praise had made mute humbleness misproud,
The song with answering song applauded thus,
But of that Daulian dream of Itylus.
So but for love's love haply was it--nay,
How else?--that even their song took my song's part,
For love of love and sweetness of sweet heart,
Or god-given glorious madness of mid May
And heat of heart and hunger and thirst to sing,
Full of the new wine of the wind of spring.

Or if this were not, and it be not sin
To hold myself in spirit of thy sweet kin,
In heart and spirit of song;
If this my great love do thy grace no wrong,
Thy grace that gave me grace to dwell therein;
If thy gods thus be my gods, and their will
Made my song part of thy song--even such part
As man's hath of God's heart--
And my life like as thy life to fulfil;
What have our gods then given us? Ah, to thee,
Sister, much more, much happier than to me,
Much happier things they have given, and more of grace
Than falls to man's light race;
For lighter are we, all our love and pain
Lighter than thine, who knowest of time or place
Thus much, that place nor time
Can heal or hurt or lull or change again
The singing soul that makes his soul sublime
Who hears the far fall of its fire-fledged rhyme
Fill darkness as with bright and burning rain
Till all the live gloom inly glows, and light
Seems with the sound to cleave the core of night.

The singing soul that moves thee, and that moved
When thou wast woman, and their songs divine
Who mixed for Grecian mouths heaven's lyric wine
Fell dumb, fell down reproved
Before one sovereign Lesbian song of thine.
That soul, though love and life had fain held fast,
Wind-winged with fiery music, rose and past
Through the indrawn hollow of earth and heaven and hell,
As through some strait sea-shell
The wide sea's immemorial song,--the sea
That sings and breathes in strange men's ears of thee
How in her barren bride-bed, void and vast,
Even thy soul sang itself to sleep at last.

To sleep? Ah, then, what song is this, that here
Makes all the night one ear,
One ear fulfilled and mad with music, one
Heart kindling as the heart of heaven, to hear
A song more fiery than the awakening sun
Sings, when his song sets fire
To the air and clouds that build the dead night's pyre?
_O thou of divers-coloured mind, O thou
Deathless, God's daughter subtle-souled_--lo, now,
Now too the song above all songs, in flight
Higher than the day-star's height,
And sweet as sound the moving wings of night!
_Thou of the divers-coloured seat_--behold,
Her very song of old!--
_O deathless, O God's daughter subtle-souled!_
That same cry through this boskage overhead
Rings round reiterated,
Palpitates as the last palpitated,
The last that panted through her lips and died
Not down this grey north sea's half sapped cliff-side
That crumbles toward the coastline, year by year
More near the sands and near;
The last loud lyric fiery cry she cried,
Heard once on heights Leucadian,--heard not here.

Not here; for this that fires our northland night,
This is the song that made
Love fearful, even the heart of love afraid,
With the great anguish of its great delight.
No swan-song, no far-fluttering half-drawn breath,
No word that love of love's sweet nature saith,
No dirge that lulls the narrowing lids of death,
No healing hymn of peace-prevented strife,--
This is her song of life.

_I loved thee_,--hark, one tenderer note than all--
_Atthis, of old time, once_--one low long fall,
Sighing--one long low lovely loveless call,
Dying--one pause in song so flamelike fast--
_Atthis, long since in old time overpast_--
One soft first pause and last.
One,--then the old rage of rapture's fieriest rain
Storms all the music-maddened night again.

_Child of God, close craftswoman, I beseech thee,
Bid not ache nor agony break nor master,
Lady, my spirit_--
O thou her mistress, might her cry not reach thee?
Our Lady of all men's loves, could Love go past her,
Pass, and not hear it?

She hears not as she heard not; hears not me,
O treble-natured mystery,--how should she
Hear, or give ear?--who heard and heard not thee;
Heard, and went past, and heard not; but all time
Hears all that all the ravin of his years
Hath cast not wholly out of all men's ears
And dulled to death with deep dense funeral chime
Of their reiterate rhyme.
And now of all songs uttering all her praise,
All hers who had thy praise and did thee wrong,
Abides one song yet of her lyric days,
Thine only, this thy song.

O soul triune, woman and god and bird,
Man, man at least has heard.
All ages call thee conqueror, and thy cry
The mightiest as the least beneath the sky
Whose heart was ever set to song, or stirred
With wind of mounting music blown more high
Than wildest wing may fly,
Hath heard or hears,--even Æschylus as I.
But when thy name was woman, and thy word
Human,--then haply, surely then meseems
This thy bird's note was heard on earth of none,
Of none save only in dreams.
In all the world then surely was but one
Song; as in heaven at highest one sceptred sun
Regent, on earth here surely without fail
One only, one imperious nightingale.
Dumb was the field, the woodland mute, the lawn
Silent; the hill was tongueless as the vale
Even when the last fair waif of cloud that felt
Its heart beneath the colouring moonrays melt,
At high midnoon of midnight half withdrawn,
Bared all the sudden deep divine moondawn.
Then, unsaluted by her twin-born tune,
That latter timeless morning of the moon
Rose past its hour of moonrise; clouds gave way
To the old reconquering ray,
But no song answering made it more than day;
No cry of song by night
Shot fire into the cloud-constraining light.
One only, one Æolian island heard
Thrill, but through no bird's throat,
In one strange manlike maiden's godlike note,
The song of all these as a single bird.
Till the sea's portal was as funeral gate
For that sole singer in all time's ageless date
Singled and signed for so triumphal fate,
All nightingales but one in all the world
All her sweet life were silent; only then,
When her life's wing of womanhood was furled,
Their cry, this cry of thine was heard again,
As of me now, of any born of men.
Through sleepless clear spring nights filled full of thee,
Rekindled here, thy ruling song has thrilled
The deep dark air and subtle tender sea
And breathless hearts with one bright sound fulfilled.
Or at midnoon to me
Swimming, and birds about my happier head
Skimming, one smooth soft way by water and air,
To these my bright born brethren and to me
Hath not the clear wind borne or seemed to bear
A song wherein all earth and heaven and sea
Were molten in one music made of thee
To enforce us, O our sister of the shore,
Look once in heart back landward and adore?
For songless were we sea-mews, yet had we
More joy than all things joyful of thee--more,
Haply, than all things happiest; nay, save thee,
In thy strong rapture of imperious joy
Too high for heart of sea-borne bird or boy,
What living things were happiest if not we?
But knowing not love nor change nor wrath nor wrong,
No more we knew of song.

Song, and the secrets of it, and their might,
What blessings curse it and what curses bless,
I know them since my spirit had first in sight,
Clear as thy song's words or the live sun's light,
The small dark body's Lesbian loveliness
That held the fire eternal; eye and ear
Were as a god's to see, a god's to hear,
Through all his hours of daily and nightly chime,
The sundering of the two-edged spear of time:
The spear that pierces even the sevenfold shields
Of mightiest Memory, mother of all songs made,
And wastes all songs as roseleaves kissed and frayed
As here the harvest of the foam-flowered fields;
But thine the spear may waste not that he wields
Since first the God whose soul is man's live breath,
The sun whose face hath our sun's face for shade,
Put all the light of life and love and death
Too strong for life, but not for love too strong,
Where pain makes peace with pleasure in thy song,
And in thine heart, where love and song make strife,
Fire everlasting of eternal life.




THE GARDEN OF CYMODOCE


Sea, and bright wind, and heaven of ardent air,
More dear than all things earth-born; O to me
Mother more dear than love's own longing, sea,
More than love's eyes are, fair,
Be with my spirit of song as wings to bear,
As fire to feel and breathe and brighten; be
A spirit of sense more deep of deity,
A light of love, if love may be, more strong
In me than very song.
For song I have loved with second love, but thee,
Thee first, thee, mother; ere my songs had breath,
That love of loves, whose bondage makes man free,
Was in me strong as death.
And seeing no slave may love thee, no, not one
That loves not freedom more,
And more for thy sake loves her, and for hers
Thee; or that hates not, on whate'er thy shore
Or what thy wave soever, all things done
Of man beneath the sun
In his despite and thine, to cross and curse
Your light and song that as with lamp and verse
Guide safe the strength of our sphered universe,
Thy breath it was, thou knowest, and none but thine,
That taught me love of one thing more divine.

    Ah, yet my youth was old                                [_Str._ 1.
    Its first years dead and cold
    As last year's autumn's gold,
And all my spirit of singing sick and sad and sere,
    Or ever I might behold
    The fairest of thy fold
    Engirt, enringed, enrolled,
In all thy flower-sweet flock of islands dear and near.

    Yet in my heart I deemed                                [_Str._ 2.
    The fairest things, meseemed,
    Truth, dreaming, ever dreamed,
Had made mine eyes already like a god's to see:
    Of all sea-things that were
    Clothed on with water and air,
    That none could live more fair
Than thy sweet love long since had shown for love to me.

    I knew not, mother of mine,                             [_Ant._ 1.
    That one birth more divine
    Than all births else of thine
That hang like flowers or jewels on thy deep soft breast
    Was left for me to shine
    Above thy girdling line
    Of bright and breathing brine,
To take mine eyes with rapture and my sense with rest.

    That this was left for me,                              [_Ant._2.
    Mother, to have of thee,
    To touch, to taste, to see,
To feel as fire fulfilling all my blood and breath,
    As wine of living fire
    Keen as the heart's desire
    That makes the heart its pyre
And on its burning visions burns itself to death.

For here of all thy waters, here of all
Thy windy ways the wildest, and beset
As some beleaguered city's war-breached wall
With deaths enmeshed all round it in deep net,
Thick sown with rocks deadlier than steel, and fierce
With loud cross-countering currents, where the ship
Flags, flickering like a wind-bewildered leaf,
The densest weft of waves that prow may pierce
Coils round the sharpest warp of shoals that dip
Suddenly, scarce well under for one brief
Keen breathing-space between the streams adverse,
Scarce showing the fanged edge of one hungering lip
Or one tooth lipless of the ravening reef;
And midmost of the murderous water's web
All round it stretched and spun,
Laughs, reckless of rough tide and raging ebb,
The loveliest thing that shines against the sun.

O flower of all wind-flowers and sea-flowers,               [_Str._ 3.
  Made lovelier by love of the sea
Than thy golden own field-flowers, or tree-flowers
  Like foam of the sea-facing tree!
No foot but the seamew's there settles
  On the spikes of thine anthers like horns,
With snow-coloured spray for thy petals,
    Black rocks for thy thorns.

Was it here, in the waste of his waters,                    [_Ant._ 3.
  That the lordly north wind, when his love
On the fairest of many king's daughters
  Bore down for a spoil from above,
Chose forth of all farthest far islands
  As a haven to harbour her head,
Of all lowlands on earth and all highlands,
    His bride-worthy bed?

Or haply, my sea-flower, he found thee                      [_Str._ 4.
  Made fast as with anchors to land,
And broke, that his waves might be round thee,
  Thy fetters like rivets of sand?
And afar by the blast of him drifted
  Thy blossom of beauty was borne,
As a lark by the heart in her lifted
    To mix with the morn?

By what rapture of rage, by what vision                     [_Ant._ 4.
  Of a heavenlier heaven than above,
Was he moved to devise thy division
  From the land as a rest for his love?
As a nest when his wings would remeasure
  The ways where of old they would be,
As a bride-bed upbuilt for his pleasure
    By sea-rock and sea?

For in no deeps of midmost inland May
More flowerbright flowers the hawthorn, or more sweet
Swells the wild gold of the earth for wandering feet;
For on no northland way
Crowds the close whin-bloom closer, set like thee
With thorns about for fangs of sea-rock shown
Through blithe lips of the bitter brine to lee;
Nor blithelier landward comes the sea-wind blown,
Nor blithelier leaps the land-wind back to sea:
Nor louder springs the living song of birds
To shame our sweetest words.
And in the narrowest of thine hollowest hold
For joy thine aspens quiver as though for cold,
And many a self-lit flower-illumined tree
Outlaughs with snowbright or with rosebright glee
The laughter of the fields whose laugh is gold.
Yea, even from depth to height,
Even thine own beauty with its own delight
Fulfils thine heart in thee an hundredfold
Beyond the larger hearts of islands bright
With less intense contraction of desire
Self-satiate, centred in its own deep fire;
Of shores not self-enchanted and entranced
By heavenly severance from all shadow of mirth
Or mourning upon earth:
As thou, by no similitude enhanced,
By no fair foil made fairer, but alone
Fair as could be no beauty save thine own,
And wondrous as no world-beholden wonder:
Throned, with the world's most perilous sea for throne,
And praised from all its choral throats of thunder.

  Yet one praise hast thou, holier                          [_Str._ 5.
    Than praise of theirs may be,
  To exalt thee, wert thou lowlier
    Than all that take the sea
  With shores whence waves ebb slowlier
    Than these fall off from thee;

That One, whose name gives glory,                           [_Ant._ 5.
  One man whose life makes light,
One crowned and throned in story
  Above all empire's height,
Came, where thy straits run hoary,
  To hold thee fast in sight;

With hallowing eyes to hold thee,                           [_Str._ 6.
  With rapturous heart to read,
To encompass and enfold thee
  With love whence all men feed,
To brighten and behold thee,
  Who is mightiest of man's seed:

More strong than strong disaster,                           [_Ant._ 6.
  For fate and fear too strong;
Earth's friend, whose eyes look past her,
  Whose hands would purge of wrong;
Our lord, our light, our master,
  Whose word sums up all song.

Be it April or September                                    [_Str._ 7.
  That plays his perfect part,
Burn June or blow December,
  Thou canst not in thine heart
But rapturously remember,
  All heavenlike as thou art,

Whose footfall made thee fairer,                            [_Ant._ 7.
  Whose passage more divine,
Whose hand, our thunder-bearer,
  Held fire that bade thee shine
With subtler glory and rarer
  Than thrills the sun's own shrine.

Who knows how then his godlike banished gaze
Turned haply from its goal of natural days
And homeward hunger for the clear French clime,
Toward English earth, whereunder now the Accursed
Rots, in the hate of all men's hearts inhearsed,
A carrion ranker to the sense of time
For that sepulchral gift of stone and lime
By royal grace laid on it, less of weight
Than the load laid by fate,
Fate, misbegotten child of his own crime,
Son of as foul a bastard-bearing birth
As even his own on earth;
Less heavy than the load of cursing piled
By loyal grace of all souls undefiled
On one man's head, whose reeking soul made rotten
The loathed live corpse on earth once misbegotten?
But when our Master's homeless feet were here
France yet was foul with joy more foul than fear,
And slavery chosen, more vile by choice of chance
Than dull damnation of inheritance
From Russian year to year
Alas fair mother of men, alas my France,
What ailed thee so to fall, that wert so dear
For all men's sake to all men, in such trance,
Plague-stricken? Had the very Gods, that saw
Thy glory lighten on us for a law,
Thy gospel go before us for a guide,
Had these waxed envious of our love and awe,
Or was it less their envy than thy pride
That bared thy breast for the obscene vulture-claw,
High priestess, by whose mouth Love prophesied
That fate should yet mean freedom? Howsoever,
That hour, the helper of men's hearts, we praise,
Which blots out of man's book of after days
The name above all names abhorred for ever.
And His name shall we praise not, whom these flowers,
These rocks and ravening waters bound for girth
Round this wild starry spanlong plot of earth,
Beheld, the mightier for those heavier hours
That bowed his heart not down
Nor marred one crowning blossom of his crown?
For surely, might we say,
Even from the dark deep sea-gate that makes way
Through channelled darkness for the darkling day
Hardly to let men's faltering footfall win
The sunless passage in,
Where breaks a world aflower against the sun,
A small sweet world of wave-encompassed wonder
Kept from the wearier landward world asunder
With violence of wild waters, and with thunder
Of many winds as one,
To where the keen sea-current grinds and frets
The black bright sheer twin flameless Altarlets
That lack no live blood-sacrifice they crave
Of shipwreck and the shrine-subservient wave,
Having for priest the storm-wind, and for choir
Lightnings and clouds whose prayer and praise are fire,
All the isle acclaimed him coming; she, the least
Of all things loveliest that the sea's love hides
From strange men's insult, walled about with tides
That bid strange guests back from her flower-strewn feast,
Set all her fields aflower, her flowers aflame,
To applaud him that he came.
Nor surely flashed not something of delight
Through that steep strait of rock whose twin-cliffed height
Links crag with crag reiterate, land with land,
By one sheer thread of narrowing precipice
Bifront, that binds and sunders
Abyss from hollower imminent abyss
And wilder isle with island, blind for bliss
Of sea that lightens and of wind that thunders;
Nor pealed not surely back from deep to steep
Reverberate acclamation, steep to deep
Inveterately reclaiming and replying
Praise, and response applausive; nor the sea,
For all the sea-wind's crying,
Knew not the song her sister, even as she
Thundering, or like her confluent spring-tides brightening,
And like her darkness lightening;
The song that moved about him silent, now
Both soundless wings refolded and refurled
On that Promethean brow,
Then quivering as for flight that wakes the world.

From the roots of the rocks underlying the gulfs that engird it around
                                                            [_Str._ 8.
Was the isle not enkindled with light of him landing, or thrilled not
    with sound?
Yea, surely the sea like a harper laid hand on the shore as a lyre,
As the lyre in his own for a birthright of old that was given of his sire,
And the hand of the child was put forth on the chords yet alive and aflame
From the hand of the God that had wrought it in heaven; and the hand was
    the same.
And the tongue of the child spake, singing; and never a note that he sang,
But the strings made answer unstricken, as though for the God they rang.
And the eyes of the child shone, lightening; and touched as by life at his
    nod,
They shuddered with music, and quickened as though from the glance of the
    God.
So trembled the heart of the hills and the rocks to receive him, and
    yearned
With desirous delight of his presence and love that beholding him burned.
Yea, down through the mighty twin hollows where never the sunlight shall
    be,
Deep sunk under imminent earth, and subdued to the stress of the sea,
That feel when the dim week changes by change of their tides in the dark,
As the wave sinks under within them, reluctant, removed from its mark,
Even there in the terror of twilight in bloom with its blossoms ablush,
Did a sense of him touch not the gleam of their flowers with a fierier
    flush?
Though the sun they behold not for ever, yet knew they not over them One
Whose soul was the soul of the morning, whose song was the song of the sun?
But the secrets inviolate of sunlight in hollows untrodden of day,
Shall he dream what are these who beholds not? or he that hath seen,
    shall he say?
For the path is for passage of sea-mews; and he that hath glided and leapt
Over sea-grass and sea-rock, alighting as one from a citadel crept
That his foemen beleaguer, descending by darkness and stealth, at the last
Peers under, and all is as hollow to hellward, agape and aghast.
But afloat and afar in the darkness a tremulous colour subsides  [_Ant._ 8.
From the crimson high crest of the purple-peaked roof to the soft-coloured
    sides
That brighten as ever they widen till downward the level is won
Of the soundless and colourless water that knows not the sense of the sun:
From the crown of the culminant arch to the floor of the lakelet abloom,
One infinite blossom of blossoms innumerable aflush through the gloom.
All under the deeps of the darkness are glimmering; all over impends
An immeasurable infinite flower of the dark that dilates and descends,
That exults and expands in its breathless and blind efflorescence of heart
As it broadens and bows to the wave-ward, and breathes not, and hearkens
    apart.
As a beaker inverse at a feast on Olympus, exhausted of wine,
But inlaid as with rose from the lips of Dione that left it divine:
From the lips everliving of laughter and love everlasting, that leave
In the cleft of his heart who shall kiss them a snake to corrode it and
    cleave.
So glimmers the gloom into glory, the glory recoils into gloom,
That the eye of the sun could not kindle, the lip not of Love could relume.
So darkens reverted the cup that the kiss of her mouth set on fire:
So blackens a brand in his eyeshot asmoulder awhile from the pyre.
For the beam from beneath and without it refrangent again from the wave
Strikes up through the portal a ghostly reverse on the dome of the cave,
On the depth of the dome ever darkling and dim to the crown of its arc:
That the sun-coloured tapestry, sunless for ever, may soften the dark.
But within through the side-seen archway a glimmer again from the right
Is the seal of the sea's tide set on the mouth of the mystery of night.
And the seal on the seventh day breaks but a little, that man by its mean
May behold what the sun hath not looked on, the stars of the night have
    not seen.

Even like that hollow-bosomed rose, inverse
And infinite, the heaven of thy vast verse,
Our Master, over all our souls impends,
Imminent; we, with heart-enkindled eyes
Upwondering, search the music-moulded skies
Sphere by sweet sphere, concordant as it blends
Light of bright sound, sound of clear light, in one,
As all the stars found utterance through the sun.
And all that heaven is like a rose in bloom,
Flower-coloured, where its own sun's fires illume
As from one central and imperious heart
The whole sky's every part:
But lightening still and darkling downward, lo
The light and darkness of it,
The leaping of the lamping levin afar
Between the full moon and the sunset star,
The war-song of the sounding skies aglow,
That have the herald thunder for their prophet:
From north to south the lyric lights that leap,
The tragic sundawns reddening east and west
As with bright blood from one Promethean breast,
The peace of noon that strikes the sea to sleep,
The wail over the world of all that weep,
The peace of night when death brings life on rest.

Goddess who gatherest all the herded waves
Into thy great sweet pastureless green fold,
Even for our love of old,
I pray thee by thy power that slays and saves,
Take thou my song of this thy flower to keep
Who hast my heart in hold;
And from thine high place of thy garden-steep,
Where one sheer terrace oversees thy deep
From the utmost rock-reared height
Down even to thy dear depths of night and light,
Take my song's salutation; and on me
Breathe back the benediction of thy sea.



_Between two seas the sea-bird's wing makes halt,
  Wind-weary; while with lifting head he waits
  For breath to reinspire him from the gates
That open still toward sunrise on the vault
High-domed of morning, and in flight's default
  With spreading sense of spirit anticipates
  What new sea now may lure beyond the straits
His wings exulting that her winds exalt
And fill them full as sails to seaward spread,
  Fulfilled with fair speed's promise. Pass, my song,
Forth to the haven of thy desire and dread,
  The presence of our lord, long loved and long
Far off above beholden, who to thee
Was as light kindling all a windy sea._




BIRTHDAY ODE

FOR THE ANNIVERSARY FESTIVAL OF VICTOR HUGO,
FEBRUARY 26, 1880


  Spring, born in heaven ere many a springtime flown,    [_Strophe_ 1.
  Dead spring that sawest on earth
  A babe of deathless birth,
  A flower of rosier flowerage than thine own,
  A glory of goodlier godhead; even this day,
  That floods the mist of February with May,
  And strikes death dead with sunlight, and the breath
  Whereby the deadly doers are done to death,
  They that in day's despite
  Would crown the imperial night,                                   10
  And in deep hate of insubmissive spring
  Rethrone the royal winter for a king,
  This day that casts the days of darkness down
  Low as a broken crown,
  We call thee from the gulf of deeds and days,
  Deathless and dead, to hear us whom we praise.

  A light of many lights about thine head,           [_Antistrophe_ 1.
  Lights manifold and one,
  Stars molten in a sun,
  A sun of divers beams incorporated,                               20
  Compact of confluent aureoles, each more fair
  Than man, save only at highest of man, may wear,
  So didst thou rise, when this our grey-grown age
  Had trod two paces of his pilgrimage,
  Two paces through the gloom
  From his fierce father's tomb,
  Led by cross lights of lightnings, and the flame
  That burned in darkness round one darkling name;
  So didst thou rise, nor knewest thy glory, O thou
  Re-risen upon us now,                                             30
  The glory given thee for a grace to give,
  And take the praise of all men's hearts that live.

        First in the dewy ray                              [_Epode_ 1.
        Ere dawn be slain of day
    The fresh crowned lilies of discrowned kings' prime
        Sprang splendid as of old
        With moonlight-coloured gold
    And rays refract from the oldworld heaven of time;
      Pale with proud light of stars decreased                      39
In westward wane reluctant from the conquering east.

  But even between their golden olden bloom                 [_Str._ 2.
  Strange flowers of wildwood glory,
  With frost and moonshine hoary,
  Thrust up the new growths of their green-leaved gloom,
  Red buds of ballad blossom, where the dew
  Blushed as with bloodlike passion, and its hue
  Was as the life and love of hearts on flame,
  And fire from forth of each live chalice came:
  Young sprays of elder song,
  Stem straight and petal strong,                                   50
  Bright foliage with dark frondage overlaid,
  And light the lovelier for its lordlier shade;
  And morn and even made loud in woodland lone
  With cheer of clarions blown,
  And through the tournay's clash and clarion's cheer
  Laugh to laugh echoing, tear washed off by tear.

  Then eastward far past northland lea and lawn
  Beneath a heavier light                                   [_Ant._ 2.
  Of stormier day and night
  Began the music of the heaven of dawn;                            60
  Bright sound of battle along the Grecian waves,
  Loud light of thunder above the Median graves,
  New strife, new song on Æschylean seas,
  Canaris risen above Themistocles;
  Old glory of warrior ghosts
  Shed fresh on filial hosts,
  With dewfall redder than the dews of day,
  And earth-born lightnings out of bloodbright spray;
  Then through the flushed grey gloom on shadowy sheaves
  Low flights of falling leaves;                                    70
  And choirs of birds transfiguring as they throng
  All the world's twilight and the soul's to song.

        Voices more dimly deep                               [_Ep._ 2.
        Than the inmost heart of sleep,
    And tenderer than the rose-mouthed morning's lips;
        And midmost of them heard
        The viewless water's word,
    The sea's breath in the wind's wing and the ship's,
      That bids one swell and sound and smite                       79
And rend that other in sunder as with fangs by night.

  But ah! the glory of shadow and mingling ray,             [_Str._ 3.
  The story of morn and even
  Whose tale was writ in heaven
  And had for scroll the night, for scribe the day!
  For scribe the prophet of the morning, far
  Exalted over twilight and her star;
  For scroll beneath his Apollonian hand
  The dim twin wastes of sea and glimmering land.
  Hark, on the hill-wind, clear
  For all men's hearts to hear                                      90
  Sound like a stream at nightfall from the steep
  That all time's depths might answer, deep to deep,
  With trumpet-measures of triumphal wail
  From windy vale to vale,
  The crying of one for love that strayed and sinned
  Whose brain took madness of the mountain wind.

  Between the birds of brighter and duskier wing,           [_Ant._ 3.
  What mightier-moulded forms
  Girt with red clouds and storms
  Mix their strong hearts with theirs that soar and sing?          100
  Before the storm-blast blown of death's dark horn
  The marriage moonlight withers, that the morn
  For two made one may find three made by death
  One ruin at the blasting of its breath:
  Clothed with heart's flame renewed
  And strange new maidenhood,
  Faith lightens on the lips that bloomed for hire
  Pure as the lightning of love's first-born fire:
  Wide-eyed and patient ever, till the curse
  Find where to fall and pierce,                                   110
  Keen expiation whets with edge more dread
  A father's wrong to smite a father's head.

        Borgia, supreme from birth                           [_Ep._ 3.
        As loveliest born on earth
    Since earth bore ever women that were fair;
        Scarce known of her own house
        If daughter or sister or spouse;
    Who holds men's hearts yet helpless with her hair;
      The direst of divine things made,
Bows down her amorous aureole half suffused with shade.            120

  As red the fire-scathed royal northland bloom,            [_Str._ 4.
  That left our story a name
  Dyed through with blood and flame
  Ere her life shrivelled from a fierier doom
  Than theirs her priests bade pass from earth in fire
  To slake the thirst of God their Lord's desire:
  As keen the blast of love-enkindled fate
  That burst the Paduan tyrant's guarded gate:
  As sad the softer moan
  Made one with music's own                                        130
  For one whose feet made music as they fell
  On ways by loveless love made hot from hell:
  But higher than these and all the song thereof
  The perfect heart of love,
  The heart by fraud and hate once crucified,
  That, dying, gave thanks, and in thanksgiving died.

  Above the windy walls that rule the Rhine                 [_Ant._ 4.
  A noise of eagles' wings
  And wintry war-time rings,
  With roar of ravage trampling corn and vine                      140
  And storm of wrathful wassail dashed with song,
  And under these the watch of wreakless wrong,
  With fire of eyes anhungered; and above
  These, the light of the stricken eyes of love,
  The faint sweet eyes that follow
  The wind-outwinging swallow,
  And face athirst with young wan yearning mouth
  Turned after toward the unseen all-golden south,
  Hopeless to see the birds back ere life wane,
  Or the leaves born again;                                        150
  And still the might and music mastering fate
  Of life more strong than death and love than hate.

        In spectral strength biform                          [_Ep._ 4.
        Stand the twin sons of storm
    Transfigured by transmission of one hand
        That gives the new-born time
        Their semblance more sublime
    Than once it lightened over each man's land;
      There Freedom's winged and wide-mouthed hound,               159
And here our high Dictator, in his son discrowned.

  What strong-limbed shapes of kindred throng round these   [_Str._ 5.
  Before, between, behind,
  Sons born of one man's mind,
  Fed at his hands and fostered round his knees?
  Fear takes the spirit in thraldom at his nod,
  And pity makes it as the spirit of God,
  As his own soul that from her throne above
  Sheds on all souls of men her showers of love,
  On all earth's evil and pain
  Pours mercy forth as rain                                        170
  And comfort as the dewfall on dry land;
  And feeds with pity from a faultless hand
  All by their own fault stricken, all cast out
  By all men's scorn or doubt,
  Or with their own hands wounded, or by fate
  Brought into bondage of men's fear or hate.

  In violence of strange visions north and south
  Confronted, east and west,                                [_Ant._ 5.
  With frozen or fiery breast,
  Eyes fixed or fevered, pale or bloodred mouth,                   180
  Kept watch about his dawn-enkindled dreams;
  But ere high noon a light of nearer beams
  Made his young heaven of manhood more benign,
  And love made soft his lips with spiritual wine,
  And left them fired, and fed
  With sacramental bread,
  And sweet with honey of tenderer words than tears
  To feed men's hopes and fortify men's fears,
  And strong to silence with benignant breath
  The lips that doom to death,                                     190
  And swift with speech like fire in fiery lands
  To melt the steel's edge in the headsman's hands.

        Higher than they rose of old,                        [_Ep._ 5.
        New builded now, behold,
    The live great likeness of Our Lady's towers;
        And round them like a dove
        Wounded, and sick with love,
    One fair ghost moving, crowned with fateful flowers,
      Watched yet with eyes of bloodred lust                       199
And eyes of love's heart broken and unbroken trust.

  But sadder always under shadowier skies,                  [_Str._ 6.
  More pale and sad and clear
  Waxed always, drawn more near,
  The face of Duty lit with Love's own eyes;
  Till the awful hands that culled in rosier hours
  From fairy-footed fields of wild old flowers
  And sorcerous woods of Rhineland, green and hoary,
  Young children's chaplets of enchanted story,
  The great kind hands that showed
  Exile its homeward road,                                         210
  And, as man's helper made his foeman God,
  Of pity and mercy wrought themselves a rod,
  And opened for Napoleon's wandering kin
  France, and bade enter in,
  And threw for all the doors of refuge wide,
  Took to them lightning in the thunder-tide.

  For storm on earth above had risen from under,
  Out of the hollow of hell,                                [_Ant._ 6.
  Such storm as never fell
  From darkest deeps of heaven distract with thunder;
  A cloud of cursing, past all shape of thought,                   221
  More foul than foulest dreams, and overfraught
  With all obscene things and obscure of birth
  That ever made infection of man's earth;
  Having all hell for cloak
  Wrapped round it as a smoke
  And in its womb such offspring so defiled
  As earth bare never for her loathliest child,
  Rose, brooded, reddened, broke, and with its breath
  Put France to poisonous death;                                   230
  Yea, far as heaven's red labouring eye could glance,
  France was not, save in men cast forth of France.

        Then,--while the plague-sore grew                    [_Ep._ 6.
        Two darkling decades through,
    And rankled in the festering flesh of time,--
        Where darkness binds and frees
        The wildest of wild seas
    In fierce mutations of the unslumbering clime,
      There, sleepless too, o'er shuddering wrong
One hand appointed shook the reddening scourge of song.            240

  And through the lightnings of the apparent word
  Dividing shame's dense night                              [_Str._ 7.
  Sounds lovelier than the light
  And light more sweet than song from night's own bird
  Mixed each their hearts with other, till the gloom
  Was glorious as with all the stars in bloom,
  Sonorous as with all the spheres in chime
  Heard far through flowering heaven: the sea, sublime
  Once only with its own
  Old winds' and waters' tone,                                     250
  Sad only or glad with its own glory, and crowned
  With its own light, and thrilled with its own sound,
  Learnt now their song, more sweet than heaven's may be,
  Who pass away by sea;
  The song that takes of old love's land farewell,
  With pulse of plangent water like a knell.

  And louder ever and louder and yet more loud
  Till night be shamed of morn                              [_Ant._ 7.
  Rings the Black Huntsman's horn
  Through darkening deeps beneath the covering cloud,              260
  Till all the wild beasts of the darkness hear;
  Till the Czar quake, till Austria cower for fear,
  Till the king breathe not, till the priest wax pale,
  Till spies and slayers on seats of judgment quail,
  Till mitre and cowl bow down
  And crumble as a crown,
  Till Cæsar driven to lair and hounded Pope
  Reel breathless and drop heartless out of hope,
  And one the uncleanest kinless beast of all
  Lower than his fortune fall;                                     270
  The wolfish waif of casual empire, born
  To turn all hate and horror cold with scorn.

        Yea, even at night's full noon                       [_Ep._ 7.
        Light's birth-song brake in tune,
    Spake, witnessing that with us one must be,
        God; naming so by name
        That priests have brought to shame
    The strength whose scourge sounds on the smitten sea;
      The mystery manifold of might
Which bids the wind give back to night the things of night.        280

  Even God, the unknown of all time; force or thought,      [_Str._ 8.
  Nature or fate or will,
  Clothed round with good and ill,
  Veiled and revealed of all things and of nought,
  Hooded and helmed with mystery, girt and shod
  With light and darkness, unapparent God.
  Him the high prophet o'er his wild work bent
  Found indivisible ever and immanent
  At hidden heart of truth,
  In forms of age and youth                                        290
  Transformed and transient ever; masked and crowned,
  From all bonds loosened and with all bonds bound,
  Diverse and one with all things; love and hate,
  Earth, and the starry state
  Of heaven immeasurable, and years that flee
  As clouds and winds and rays across the sea.

  But higher than stars and deeper than the waves
  Of day and night and morrow                               [_Ant._ 8.
  That roll for all time, sorrow
  Keeps ageless watch over perpetual graves.                       300
  From dawn to morning of the soul in flower,
  Through toils and dreams and visions, to that hour
  When all the deeps were opened, and one doom
  Took two sweet lives to embrace them and entomb,
  The strong song plies its wing
  That makes the darkness ring
  And the deep light reverberate sound as deep;
  Song soft as flowers or grass more soft than sleep,
  Song bright as heaven above the mounting bird,
  Song like a God's tears heard                                    310
  Falling, fulfilled of life and death and light,
  And all the stars and all the shadow of night.

        Till, when its flight hath past                      [_Ep._ 8.
        Time's loftiest mark and last,
    The goal where good kills evil with a kiss,
        And Darkness in God's sight
        Grows as his brother Light,
    And heaven and hell one heart whence all the abyss
      Throbs with love's music; from his trance
Love waking leads it home to her who stayed in France.             320

  But now from all the world-old winds of the air           [_Str._ 9.
  One blast of record rings
  As from time's hidden springs
  With roar of rushing wings and fires that bear
  Toward north and south sonorous, east and west,
  Forth of the dark wherein its records rest,
  The story told of the ages, writ nor sung
  By man's hand ever nor by mortal tongue
  Till, godlike with desire,
  One tongue of man took fire,                                     330
  One hand laid hold upon the lightning, one
  Rose up to bear time witness what the sun
  Had seen, and what the moon and stars of night
  Beholding lost not light:
  From dawn to dusk what ways man wandering trod
  Even through the twilight of the gods to God.

  From dawn of man and woman twain and one                  [_Ant._ 9.
  When the earliest dews impearled
  The front of all the world
  Ringed with aurorean aureole of the sun,                         340
  To days that saw Christ's tears and hallowing breath
  Put life for love's sake in the lips of death,
  And years as waves whose brine was fire, whose foam
  Blood, and the ravage of Neronian Rome;
  And the eastern crescent's horn
  Mightier awhile than morn;
  And knights whose lives were flights of eagles' wings,
  And lives like snakes' lives of engendering kings;
  And all the ravin of all the swords that reap
  Lives cast as sheaves on heap                                    350
  From all the billowing harvest-fields of fight;
  And sounds of love-songs lovelier than the light.

        The grim dim thrones of the east                     [_Ep._ 9.
        Set for death's riotous feast
    Round the bright board where darkling centuries wait,
        And servile slaughter, mute,
        Feeds power with fresh red fruit,
    Glitter and groan with mortal food of fate;
      And throne and cup and lamp's bright breath
Bear witness to their lord of only night and death.                360

  Dead freedom by live empire lies defiled,                [_Str._ 10.
  And murder at his feet
  Plies lust with wine and meat,
  With offering of an old man and a child,
  With holy body and blood, inexpiable
  Communion in the sacrament of hell,
  Till, reeking from their monstrous eucharist,
  The lips wax cold that murdered where they kissed,
  And empire in mid feast
  Fall as a slaughtered beast                                      370
  Headless, and ease men's hungering hearts of fear
  Lest God were none in heaven, to see nor hear,
  And purge his own pollution with the flood
  Poured of his black base blood
  So first found healing, poisonous as it poured;
  And on the clouds the archangel cleanse his sword.

  As at the word unutterable that made                     [_Ant._ 10.
  Of day and night division,
  From vision on to vision,                                        379
  From dream to dream, from darkness into shade,
  From sunshine into sunlight, moves and lives
  The steersman's eye, the helming hand that gives
  Life to the wheels and wings that whirl along
  The immeasurable impulse of the sphere of song
  Through all the eternal years,
  Beyond all stars and spheres,
  Beyond the washing of the waves of time,
  Beyond all heights where no thought else may climb,
  Beyond the darkling dust of suns that were,
  Past height and depth of air;                                    390
  And in the abyss whence all things move that are
  Finds only living Love, the sovereign star.

        Nor less the weight and worth                       [_Ep._ 10.
        Found even of love on earth
    To wash all stain of tears and sins away,
        On dying lips alit
        That living knew not it,
    In the winged shape of song with death to play:
      To warm young children with its wings,
And try with fire the heart elect for godlike things.              400

  For all worst wants of all most miserable                [_Str._ 11.
  With divine hands to deal
  All balms and herbs that heal,
  Among all woes whereunder poor men dwell
  Our Master sent his servant Love, to be
  On earth his witness; but the strange deep sea,
  Mother of life and death inextricate,
  What work should Love do there, to war with fate?
  Yet there must Love too keep
  At heart of the eyeless deep                                     410
  Watch, and wage war wide-eyed with all its wonders,
  Lower than the lightnings of its waves, and thunders
  Of seas less monstrous than the births they bred;
  Keep high there heart and head,
  And conquer: then for prize of all toils past
  Feel the sea close them in again at last.

  A day of direr doom arisen thereafter                    [_Ant._ 11.
  With cloud and fire in strife
  Lightens and darkens life
  Round one by man's hand masked with living laughter,             420
  A man by men bemonstered, but by love,
  Watched with blind eyes as of a wakeful dove,
  And wooed by lust, that in her rosy den
  As fire on flesh feeds on the souls of men,
  To take the intense impure
  Burnt-offering of her lure,
  Divine and dark and bright and naked, strange
  With ravenous thirst of life reversed and change,
  As though the very heaven should shrivel and swell
  With hunger after hell,                                          430
  Run mad for dear damnation, and desire
  To feel its light thrilled through with stings of fire.

        Above a windier sea,                                [_Ep._ 11.
        The glory of Ninety-three
    Fills heaven with blood-red and with rose-red beams
        That earth beholding grows
        Herself one burning rose
    Flagrant and fragrant with strange deeds and dreams,
      Dreams dyed as love's own flower, and deeds
Stained as with love's own life-blood, that for love's sake bleeds.   440

  And deeper than all deeps of seas and skies              [_Str._ 12.
  Wherein the shadows are
  Called sun and moon and star
  That rapt conjecture metes with mounting eyes,
  Loud with strange waves and lustrous with new spheres,
  Shines, masked at once and manifest of years,
  Shakespeare, a heaven of heavenly eyes beholden;
  And forward years as backward years grow golden
  With light of deeds and words
  And flight of God's fleet birds,                                 450
  Angels of wrath and love and truth and pity;
  And higher on exiled eyes their natural city
  Dawns down the depths of vision, more sublime
  Than all truths born of time;
  And eyes that wept above two dear sons dead
  Grow saving stars to guard one hopeless head.

  Bright round the brows of banished age had shone          [_Ant._ 12.
  In vision flushed with truth
  The rosy glory of youth                                          459
  On streets and woodlands where in days long gone
  Sweet love sang light and loud and deep and dear:
  And far the trumpets of the dreadful year
  Had pealed and wailed in darkness: last arose
  The song of children, kindling as a rose
  At breath of sunrise, born
  Of the red flower of morn
  Whose face perfumes deep heaven with odorous light
  And thrills all through the wings of souls in flight
  Close as the press of children at His knee
  Whom if the high priest see,                                     470
  Dreaming, as homeless on dark earth he trod,
  The lips that praise him shall not know for God.

        O sovereign spirit, above                           [_Ep._ 12.
        All offering but man's love,
    All praise and prayer and incense undefiled!
        The one thing stronger found
        Than towers with iron bound;
    The one thing lovelier than a little child,
      And deeper than the seas are deep,                           479
And tenderer than such tears of love as angels weep.

  Dante, the seer of all things evil and good,             [_Str._ 13.
  Beheld two ladies, Beauty
  And high life-hallowing Duty,
  That strove for sway upon his mind and mood
  And held him in alternating accord
  Fast bound at feet of either: but our lord,
  The seer and singer of righteousness and wrong
  Who stands now master of all the keys of song,
  Sees both as dewdrops run
  Together in the sun,                                            490
  For him not twain but one thing twice divine;
  Even as his speech and song are bread and wine
  For all souls hungering and all hearts athirst
  At best of days and worst,
  And both one sacrament of Love's great giving
  To feed the spirit and sense of all souls living.

  The seventh day in the wind's month, ten years gone      [_Ant._ 13.
  Since heaven-espousing earth
  Gave the Republic birth,
  The mightiest soul put mortal raiment on                         500
  That came forth singing ever in man's ears
  Of all souls with us, and through all these years
  Rings yet the lordliest, waxen yet more strong,
  That on our souls hath shed itself in song,
  Poured forth itself like rain
  On souls like springing grain
  That with its procreant beams and showers were fed
  For living wine and sacramental bread;
  Given all itself as air gives life and light,
  Utterly, as of right;                                            510
  The goodliest gift our age hath given, to be
  Ours, while the sun gives glory to the sea.

        Our Father and Master and Lord,                     [_Ep._ 13.
        Who hast thy song for sword,
    For staff thy spirit, and our hearts for throne:
        As in past years of wrong,
        Take now my subject song,
    To no crowned head made humble but thine own;
      That on thy day of worldly birth
Gives thanks for all thou hast given past thanks of all on earth.  520

       *       *       *       *       *




NOTES


_v._ 33. _Odes et Ballades_, 1822-1824.

     57. _Les Orientales_, 1829.

     69. _Les Feuilles d'Automne_, 1831.

     71. _Les Chants du Crépuscule_, 1835.

     73. _Les Voix Intérieures_, 1837.

     81. _Les Rayons et les Ombres_, 1840.

    101. _Hernani_, 1830.

    105. _Marion de Lorme_, 1831.

    109. _Le Roi s'amuse_, 1832.

    113. _Lucrèce Borgia_, 1833.

    121. _Marie Tudor_, 1835.

    127. _Angelo, Tyran de Padoue_, 1835.

    129. _La Esmeralda_, 1836.

    133. _Ruy Blas_, 1838.

    137. _Les Burgraves_, 1842.

    153. _Cromwell_, 1827: _Étude sur Mirabeau_, 1834 (_Littérature
         et Philosophie mêlées_, 1819-1834).

    177. _Han d'Islande_, 1823. _Bug-Jargal_, 1826.

    182. _Le Dernier Jour d'un Condamné_, 1829: _Claude Gueux_, 1834.

    193. _Notre-Dame de Paris_, 1831.

    205. _Le Rhin_, 1845.

    216. _Napoléon le Petit_, 1852. _Châtiments_, 1853. _Histoire
         d'un Crime_, 1877. In this place I must take occasion to
         relieve my conscience from a sense of duty unfulfilled so
         long as I for one have not uttered my own poor private
         protest--worthless and weightless though it may seem, if
         cast as a grain into the scale of public opinion--against
         a projected insult at once to contemporary France and to
         the present only less than to past generations of
         Englishmen.

         _On the proposed desecration of Westminster Abbey
                   by the erection of a monument to
                       the son of Napoleon III_

          "Let us go hence." From the inmost shrine of grace
            Where England holds the elect of all her dead
            There comes a word like one of old time said
          By gods of old cast out. Here is no place
          At once for these and one of poisonous race.
            Let each rise up from his dishallowed bed
            And pass forth silent. Each divine veiled head
          Shall speak in silence with averted face.
          "Scorn everlasting and eternal shame
          Eat out the rotting record of his name
          Who had the glory of all these graves in trust
            And turned it to a hissing. His offence
          Makes havoc of their desecrated dust
            Whose place is here no more. Let us go hence."

                                              Feb. 25, 1880.

    297. _Les Contemplations_, 1856.

    321. _La Légende des Siècles_. _Première série_, 1859; _nouvelle
        série_, 1877.

    392. _Les Misérables_, 1862.

    409. _Les Travailleurs de la Mer_, 1866.

    417. _L'Homme qui Rit_, 1869.

    433. _Quatre-vingt-treize_, 1874.

    441. _William Shakespeare_, 1864.

    448. _Actes et Paroles_; _Avant l'Exil_, 1841-1851; _Pendant
         l'Exil_, 1852-1870; _Depuis l'Exil_, 1870-1876.

    452. _Paris_, 1867.

    455. _Mes Fils_, 1875.

    456. _Pour un Soldat_, 1875.

    457. _Les Chansons des Rues et des Bois_, 1865.

    462. _L'Année Terrible_, 1872.

    464. _L'Art d'être Grandpère_, 1877.

    470. _Le Pape_, 1878.

    497. "Septidi ventôse an X de la République (26 février 1802)."
         _Victor Hugo raconté par un témoin de sa vie_, 1863,
         _tome_ 1, p. 28.

         At the end of such a list, so incomparable as to seem
         incredible, of one great man's good works, we may be
         forgiven the alteration of a word even in a verse from
         Æschylus which we cannot choose but apply once more to
         this leader in the advance of men made perfect through
         doom of trial and long wayfaring, whose progress he
         furthers by example and stimulates by song:--

    [Greek: kurios esti throein hodion kratos aision andrôn
            ekteleôn; eti gar theothen katapneiei
            peithô molpan
            alkai sumphutos aiôn.]

                                  Æsch. _Agam._ 104-8.







End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Songs of the Springtides and Birthday
Ode, by Algernon Charles Swinburne

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SONGS OF THE SPRINGTIDES ***

***** This file should be named 18287-8.txt or 18287-8.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/1/8/2/8/18287/

Produced by Paul Murray, Diane Monico, and the Project
Gutenberg Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net.


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


ï»¿The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Tale of Balen, by Algernon Charles
Swinburne


This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org





Title: The Tale of Balen


Author: Algernon Charles Swinburne



Release Date: December 24, 2008  [eBook #2136]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8


***START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE TALE OF BALEN***


Transcribed from the 1896 Chatto & Windus edition by David Price, email
ccx074@pglaf.org

                                PRINTED BY
                 SPOTTISWOODE AND CO., NEW-STREET SQUARE
                                  LONDON





                            THE TALE OF BALEN


                                    BY
                        ALGERNON CHARLES SWINBURNE

                                * * * * *

                                  LONDON
                       CHATTO & WINDUS, PICCADILLY
                                   1896

    Copyright in the United States, 1896, by CHARLES SCRIBNERâS SONS.




DEDICATION


TO MY MOTHER


Love that holds life and death in fee,
Deep as the clear unsounded sea
And sweet as life or death can be,
Lays here my hope, my heart, and me
Before you, silent, in a song.
Since the old wild tale, made new, found grace,
When half sung through, before your face,
It needs must live a springtide space,
While April suns grow strong.

_March_ 24, 1896.




THE TALE OF BALEN


I


In hawthorn-time the heart grows light,
The world is sweet in sound and sight,
Glad thoughts and birds take flower and flight,
The heather kindles toward the light,
   The whin is frankincense and flame.
And be it for strife or be it for love
The falcon quickens as the dove
When earth is touched from heaven above
   With joy that knows no name.

And glad in spirit and sad in soul
With dream and doubt of days that roll
As waves that race and find no goal
Rode on by bush and brake and bole
   A northern child of earth and sea.
The pride of life before him lay
Radiant: the heavens of night and day
Shone less than shone before his way
   His ways and days to be.

And all his life of blood and breath
Sang out within him: time and death
Were even as words a dreamer saith
When sleep within him slackeneth,
   And light and life and spring were one.
The steed between his knees that sprang,
The moors and woods that shone and sang,
The hours where through the springâs breath rang,
   Seemed ageless as the sun.

But alway through the bounteous bloom
That earth gives thanks if heaven illume
His soul forefelt a shadow of doom,
His heart foreknew a gloomier gloom
   Than closes all menâs equal ways,
Albeit the spirit of lifeâs light spring
With pride of heart upheld him, king
And lord of hours like snakes that sting
   And nights that darken days.

And as the strong spring round him grew
Stronger, and all blithe winds that blew
Blither, and flowers that flowered anew
More glad of sun and air and dew,
   The shadow lightened on his soul
And brightened into death and died
Like winter, as the bloom waxed wide
From woodside on to riverside
   And southward goal to goal.

Along the wandering ways of Tyne,
By beech and birch and thorn that shine
And laugh when lifeâs requickening wine
Makes night and noon and dawn divine
   And stirs in all the veins of spring,
And past the brightening banks of Tees,
He rode as one that breathes and sees
A sun more blithe, a merrier breeze,
   A life that hails him king.

And down the softening south that knows
No more how glad the heather glows,
Nor how, when winterâs clarion blows
Across the bright Northumbrian snows,
   Sea-mists from east and westward meet,
Past Avon senseless yet of song
And Thames that bore but swans in throng
He rode elate in heart and strong
   In trust of days as sweet.

So came he through to Camelot,
Glad, though for shame his heart waxed hot,
For hope within it withered not
To see the shaft it dreamed of shot
   Fair toward the glimmering goal of fame,
And all King Arthurâs knightliest there
Approved him knightly, swift to dare
And keen to bid their records bear
   Sir Balenâs northern name.

Sir Balen of Northumberland
Gat grace before the king to stand
High as his heart was, and his hand
Wrought honour toward the strange north strand
   That sent him south so goodly a knight.
And envy, sick with sense of sin,
Began as poisonous herbs begin
To work in base menâs blood, akin
   To menâs of nobler might.

And even so fell it that his doom,
For all his bright lifeâs kindling bloom
And light that took no thought for gloom,
Fell as a breath from the opening tomb
   Full on him ere he wist or thought.
For once a churl of royal seed,
King Arthurâs kinsman, faint in deed
And loud in word that knew not heed,
   Spake shame where shame was nought.

âWhat doth one here in Camelot
Whose birth was northward?  Wot we not
As all his brethren borderers wot
How blind of heart, how keen and hot,
   The wild north lives and hates the south?
Men of the narrowing march that knows
Nought save the strength of storms and snows,
What would these carles where knighthood blows
   A trump of kinglike mouth?â

Swift from his place leapt Balen, smote
The liar across his face, and wrote
His wrath in blood upon the bloat
Brute cheek that challenged shame for note
   How vile a king-born knave might be.
Forth sprang their swords, and Balen slew
The knave ere well one witness knew
Of all that round them stood or drew
   What sight was there to see.

Then spake the great kingâs wrathful will
A doom for six dark months to fill
Wherein close prison held him, still
And steadfast-souled for good or ill.
   But when those weary days lay dead
His lordliest knights and barons spake
Before the king for Balenâs sake
Good speech and wise, of force to break
   The bonds that bowed his head.



II


In linden-time the heart is high
For pride of summer passing by
With lordly laughter in her eye;
A heavy splendour in the sky
   Uplifts and bows it down again.
The spring had waned from wood and wold
Since Balen left his prison hold
And lowlier-hearted than of old
   Beheld it wax and wane.

Though humble heart and poor array
Kept not from spirit and sense away
Their noble nature, nor could slay
The pride they bade but pause and stay
   Till time should bring its trust to flower,
Yet even for noble shameâs sake, born
Of hope that smiled on hate and scorn,
He held him still as earth ere morn
   Ring forth her rapturous hour.

But even as earth when dawn takes flight
And beats her wings of dewy light
Full in the faltering face of night,
His soul awoke to claim by right
   The life and death of deed and doom,
When once before the king there came
A maiden clad with grief and shame
And anguish burning her like flame
   That feeds on flowers in bloom.

Beneath a royal mantle, fair
With goodly work of lustrous vair,
Girt fast against her side she bare
A sword whose weight bade all men there
   Quail to behold her face again.
Save of a passing perfect knight
Not great alone in force and fight
It might not be for any might
   Drawn forth, and end her pain.

So said she: then King Arthur spake:
âAlbeit indeed I dare not take
Such praise on me, for knighthoodâs sake
And love of ladies will I make
   Assay if better none may be.â
By girdle and by sheath he caught
The sheathed and girded sword, and wrought
With strength whose force availed him nought
   To save and set her free.

Again she spake: âNo need to set
The might that man has matched not yet
Against it: he whose hand shall get
Grace to release the bonds that fret
   My bosom and my girdlestead
With little strain of strength or strife
Shall bring me as from death to life
And win to sister or to wife
   Fame that outlives men dead.â

Then bade the king his knights assay
This mystery that before him lay
And mocked his might of manhood.  âNay,â
Quoth she, âthe man that takes away
   This burden laid on me must be
A knight of record clean and fair
As sunlight and the flowerful air,
By sire and mother born to bear
   A name to shame not me.â

Then forth strode Launcelot, and laid
The mighty-moulded hand that made
Strong knights reel back like birds affrayed
By storm that smote them as they strayed
   Against the hilt that yielded not.
Then Tristram, bright and sad and kind
As one that bore in noble mind
Love that made light as darkness blind,
   Fared even as Launcelot.

Then Lamoracke, with hardier cheer,
As one that held all hope and fear
Wherethrough the spirit of man may steer
In life and death less dark or dear,
   Laid hand thereon, and fared as they.
With half a smile his hand he drew
Back from the spell-bound thing, and threw
With half a glance his heart anew
   Toward no such blameless may.

Between Iseult and Guenevere
Sat one of name as high to hear,
But darklier doomed than they whose cheer
Foreshowed not yet the deadlier year
   That bids the queenliest head bow down,
The queen Morgause of Orkney: they
With scarce a flash of the eye could say
The very word of dawn, when day
   Gives earth and heaven their crown.

But bright and dark as night or noon
And lowering as a storm-flushed moon
When clouds and thwarting winds distune
The music of the midnight, soon
   To die from darkening star to star
And leave a silence in the skies
That yearns till dawn find voice and rise,
Shone strange as fate Morgause, with eyes
   That dwelt on days afar.

A glance that shot on Lamoracke
As from a storm-cloud bright and black.
Fire swift and blind as deathâs own track
Turned fleet as flame on Arthur back
   From him whose hand forsook the hilt:
And one in blood and one in sin
Their hearts caught fire of pain within
And knew no goal for them to win
   But death that guerdons guilt.

Then Gawain, sweet of soul and gay
As April ere he dreams of May,
Strove, and prevailed not: then Sir Kay,
The snake-souled envier, vile as they
   That fawn and foam and lurk and lie,
Sire of the bastard band whose brood
Was alway found at servile feud
With honour, faint and false and lewd,
   Scarce grasped and put it by.

Then wept for woe the damsel bound
With iron and with anguish round,
That none to help her grief was found
Or loose the inextricably inwound
   Grim curse that girt her life with grief
And made a burden of her breath,
Harsh as the bitterness of death.
Then spake the king as one that saith
   Words bitterer even than brief.

âMethought the wide round world could bring
Before the face of queen or king
No knights more fit for fame to sing
Than fill this full Round Tableâs ring
   With honour higher than pride of place:
But now my heart is wrung to know,
Damsel, that none whom fame can show
Finds grace to heal or help thy woe:
   God gives them not the grace.â

Then from the lowliest place thereby,
With heart-enkindled cheek and eye
Most like the star and kindling sky
That say the sundawnâs hour is high
   When rapture trembles through the sea,
Strode Balen in his poor array
Forth, and took heart of grace to pray
The damsel suffer even him to assay
   His power to set her free.

Nay, how should he avail, she said,
Averse with scorn-averted head,
Where these availed not? none had sped
Of all these mightier men that led
   The lists wherein he might not ride,
And how should less men speed?  But he,
With lordlier pride of courtesy,
Put forth his hand and set her free
   From pain and humbled pride.

But on the sword he gazed elate
With hope set higher than fear or fate,
Or doubt of darkling days in wait;
And when her thankful praise waxed great
   And craved of him the sword again,
He would not give it.  âNay, for mine
It is till force may make it thine.â
A smile that shone as death may shine
   Spake toward him bale and bane.

Strange lightning flickered from her eyes.
âGentle and good in knightliest guise
And meet for quest of strange emprise
Thou hast here approved thee: yet not wise
   To keep the sword from me, I wis.
For with it thou shalt surely slay
Of all that look upon the day
The man best loved of thee, and lay
   Thine own life down for his.â

âWhat chance God sends, that chance I take,â
He said.  Then soft and still she spake;
âI would but for thine only sake
Have back the sword of thee, and break
   The links of doom that bind thee round.
But seeing thou wilt not have it so,
My heart for thine is wrung with woe.â
âGodâs will,â quoth he, âit is, we know,
   Wherewith our lives are bound.â

âRepent it must thou soon,â she said,
âWho wouldst not hear the rede I read
For thine and not for my sake, sped
In vain as waters heavenward shed
   From springs that falter and depart
Earthward.  God bids not thee believe
Truth, and the web thy life must weave
For even this sword to close and cleave
   Hangs heavy round my heart.â

So passed she mourning forth.  But he,
With heart of springing hope set free
As birds that breast and brave the sea,
Bade horse and arms and armour be
   Made straightway ready toward the fray.
Nor even might Arthurâs royal prayer
Withhold him, but with frank and fair
Thanksgiving and leave-taking there
   He turned him thence away.



III


As the east wind, when the morningâs breast
Gleams like a birdâs that leaves the nest,
A fledgeling halcyonâs bound on quest,
Drives wave on wave on wave to west
   Till all the sea be life and light,
So timeâs mute breath, that brings to bloom
All flowers that strew the dead springâs tomb,
Drives day on day on day to doom
   Till all manâs day be night.

Brief as the breaking of a wave
That hurls on man his thunderous grave
Ere fear find breath to cry or crave
Life that no chance may spare or save,
   The light of joy and glory shone
Even as in dreams where death seems dead
Round Balenâs hope-exalted head,
Shone, passed, and lightened as it fled
   The shadow of doom thereon.

For as he bound him thence to fare,
Before the stately presence there
A lady like a windflower fair,
Girt on with raiment strange and rare
   That rippled whispering round her, came.
Her clear cold eyes, all glassy grey,
Seemed lit not with the light of day
But touched with gleams that waned away
   Of quelled and fading flame.

Before the king she bowed and spake:
âKing, for thine old faithâs plighted sake
To me the lady of the lake,
I come in trust of thee to take
   The guerdon of the gift I gave,
Thy sword Excalibur.â  And he
Made answer: âBe it whateâer it be,
If mine to give, I give it thee,
   Nor need is thine to crave.â

As when a gleam of wicked light
Turns half a low-lying water bright
That moans beneath the shivering night
With sense of evil sound and sight
   And whispering witchcraftâs bated breath,
Her wan face quickened as she said:
âThis knight that won the swordâhis head
I crave or hers that brought it.  Dead,
   Let these be one in death.â

âNot with mine honour this may be;
Ask all save this thou wilt,â quoth he,
âAnd have thy full desire.â  But she
Made answer: âNought will I of thee,
   Nought if not this.â  Then Balen turned,
And saw the sorceress hard beside
By whose fell craft his mother died:
Three years he had sought her, and here espied
   His heart against her yearned.

âIll be thou met,â he said, âwhose ire
Would slake with blood thy soulâs desire:
By thee my mother died in fire;
Die thou by me a death less dire.â
   Sharp flashed his sword forth, fleet as flame,
And shore away her sorcerous head.
âAlas for shame,â the high king said,
âThat one found once my friend lies dead;
   Alas for all our shame!

âThou shouldst have here forborne her; yea,
Were all the wrongs that bid men slay
Thine, heaped too high for wrath to weigh,
Not here before my face today
   Was thine the right to wreak thy wrong.â
Still stood he then as one that found
His rose of hope by storm discrowned,
And all the joy that girt him round
   Brief as a broken song.

Yet ere he passed he turned and spake:
âKing, only for thy nobler sake
Than aught of power manâs power may take
Or pride of place that pride may break
   I bid the lordlier man in thee,
That lives within the king, give ear.
This justice done before thee here
On one that hellâs own heart holds dear,
   Needs might not this but be.

âAlbeit, for all that pride would prove,
My heart be wrung to lose thy love,
It yet repents me not hereof:
So many an eagle and many a dove,
   So many a knight, so many a may,
This water-snake of poisonous tongue
To death by words and wiles hath stung,
That her their slayer, from hellâs lake sprung,
   I did not ill to slay.â

âYea,â said the king, âtoo high of heart
To stand before a king thou art;
Yet irks it me to bid thee part
And take thy penance for thy part,
   That God may put upon thy pride.â
Then Balen took the severed head
And toward his hostry turned and sped
As one that knew not quick from dead
   Nor good from evil tide.

He bade his squire before him stand
And take that sanguine spoil in hand
And bear it far by shore and strand
Till all in glad Northumberland
   That loved him, seeing it, all might know
His deadliest foe was dead, and hear
How free from prison as from fear
He dwelt in trust of the answering year
   To bring him weal for woe.

âAnd tell them, now I take my way
To meet in battle, if I may,
King Ryons of North Wales, and slay
That king of kernes whose fiery sway
   Doth all the marches dire despite
That serve King Arthur: so shall he
Again be gracious lord to me,
And I that leave thee meet with thee
   Once more in Arthurâs sight.â

So spake he ere they parted, nor
Took shame or fear to counsellor,
As one whom none laid ambush for;
And wist not how Sir Launceor,
   The wild kingâs son of Ireland, hot
And high in wrath to know that one
Stood higher in fame before the sun,
Even Balen, since the sword was won,
   Drew nigh from Camelot.

For thence, in heat of hate and pride,
As one that man might bid not bide,
He craved the high kingâs grace to ride
On quest of Balen far and wide
   And wreak the wrong his wrath had wrought.
âYea,â Arthur said, âfor such despite
Was done me never in my sight
As this thine hand shall now requite
   If trust avail us aught.â

But ere he passed, in eager mood
To feed his hate with bitter food,
Before the kingâs face Merlin stood
And heard his tale of ill and good,
   Of Balen, and the sword achieved,
And whence it smote as heavenâs red ire
That direful dame of doom as dire;
And how the kingâs wrath turned to fire
   The grief wherewith he grieved.

And darkening as he gave it ear,
The still face of the sacred seer
Waxed wan with wrath and not with fear,
And ever changed its cloudier cheer
   Till all his face was very night.
âThis damosel that brought the sword,â
He said, âbefore the king my lord,
And all these knights about his board,
   Hath done them all despite.

âThe falsest damosel she is
That works men ill on earth, I wis,
And all her mind is toward but this,
To kill as with a lying kiss
   Truth, and the life of noble trust.
A brother hath she,âsee but now
The flame of shame that brands her brow!â
A true man, pure as faithâs own vow,
   Whose honour knows not rust.

âThis good knight found within her bower
A felon and her paramour,
And slew him in his shameful hour,
As right gave might and righteous power
   To hands that wreaked so foul a wrong.
Then, for the hate her heart put on,
She sought by ways where death had gone
The lady Lyle of Avalon,
   Whose crafts are strange and strong.

âThe sorceress, one with her in thought,
Gave her that sword of magic, wrought
By charms whereof sweet heaven sees nought,
That hither girt on her she brought
   To be by doom her brotherâs bane.
And grief it is to think how he
That won it, being of heart so free
And perfect found in chivalry,
   Shall by that sword lie slain.

Great pity it is and strange despite
That one whose eyes are stars to light
Honour, and shine as heavenâs own height,
Should perish, being the goodliest knight
   That even the all-glorious north has borne.
Nor shall my lord the king behold
A lordlier friend of mightier mould
Than Balen, though his tale be told
   Ere noon fulfil his morn.â



IV


As morning hears before it run
The music of the mounting sun,
And laughs to watch his trophies won
From darkness, and her hosts undone,
   And all the night become a breath,
Nor dreams that fear should hear and flee
The summer menace of the sea,
So hears our hope what life may be,
   And knows it not for death.

Each day that slays its hours and dies
Weeps, laughs, and lightens on our eyes,
And sees and hears not: smiles and sighs
As flowers ephemeral fall and rise
   About its birth, about its way,
And pass as love and sorrow pass,
As shadows flashing down a glass,
As dew-flowers blowing in flowerless grass,
   As hope from yesterday.

The blossom of the sunny dew
That now the stronger sun strikes through
Fades off the blade whereon it blew
No fleetlier than the flowers that grew
   On hopeâs green stem in lifeâs fierce light.
Nor might the glory soon to sit
Awhile on Balenâs crest alit
Outshine the shadow of doom on it
   Or stay deathâs wings from flight.

Dawn on a golden moorland side
By holt and heath saw Balen ride
And Launceor after, pricked with pride
And stung with spurring envy: wide
   And far he had ridden athwart strange lands
And sought amiss the man he found
And cried on, till the stormy sound
Rang as a rallying trumpet round
   That fires menâs hearts and hands.

Abide he bade him: nor was need
To bid when Balen wheeled his steed
Fiercely, less fain by word than deed
To bid his envier evil speed,
   And cried, âWhat wilt thou with me?â  Loud
Rang Launceorâs vehement answer: âKnight,
To avenge on thee the dire despite
Thou hast done us all in Arthurâs sight
   I stand toward Arthur vowed.â

âAy?â Balen said: âalbeit I see
I needs must deal in strife with thee,
Light is the wyte thou layest on me;
For her I slew and sinned not, she
   Was dire in all menâs eyes as death,
Or none were lother found than I
By me to bid a woman die:
As lief were loyal men to lie,
   Or scorn what honour saith.â

As the arched waveâs weight against the reef
Hurls, and is hurled back like a leaf
Storm-shrivelled, and its rage of grief
Speaks all the loud broad sea in brief,
   And quells the hearkening hearts of men,
Or as the crash of overfalls
Down under blue smooth water brawls
Like jarring steel on ruining walls,
   So rang their meeting then.

As wave on wave shocks, and confounds
The bounding bulk whereon it bounds
And breaks and shattering seaward sounds
As crying of the old seaâs wolves and hounds
   That moan and ravin and rage and wail,
So steed on steed encountering sheer
Shocked, and the strength of Launceorâs spear
Shivered on Balenâs shield, and fear
   Bade hope within him quail.

But Balenâs spear through Launceorâs shield
Clove as a ploughshare cleaves the field
And pierced the hauberk triple-steeled,
That horse with horseman stricken reeled,
   And as a storm-breached rock falls, fell.
And Balen turned his horse again
And wist not yet his foe lay slain,
And saw him dead that sought his bane
   And wrought and fared not well.

Suddenly, while he gazed and stood,
And mused in many-minded mood
If life or death were evil or good,
Forth of a covert of a wood
   That skirted half the moorland lea
Fast rode a maiden flower-like white
Full toward that fair wild place of fight,
Anhungered of the woful sight
   God gave her there to see.

And seeing the man there fallen and dead,
She cried against the sun that shed
Light on the living world, and said,
âO Balen, slayer whose hand is red,
   Two bodies and one heart thou hast slain,
Two hearts within one body: aye,
Two souls thou hast lost; by thee they die,
Cast out of sight of earth and sky
   And all that made them fain.â

And from the dead his sword she caught,
And fell in trance that wist of nought,
Swooning: but softly Balen sought
To win from her the sword she thought
   To die on, dying by Launceorâs side.
Again her wakening wail outbroke
As wildly, sword in hand, she woke
And struck one swift and bitter stroke
   That healed her, and she died.

And sorrowing for their strange loveâs sake
Rode Balen forth by lawn and lake,
By moor and moss and briar and brake,
And in his heart their sorrow spake
   Whose lips were dumb as death, and said
Mute words of presage blind and vain
As rain-stars blurred and marred by rain
To wanderers on a moonless main
   Where night and day seem dead.

Then toward a sunbright wildwood side
He looked and saw beneath it ride
A knight whose arms afar espied
By note of name and proof of pride
   Bare witness of his brother born,
His brother Balan, hard at hand,
Twin flower of bright Northumberland,
Twin sea-bird of their loud sea-strand,
   Twin song-bird of their morn.

Ah then from Balen passed away
All dread of night, all doubt of day,
All care what life or death might say,
All thought of all worse months than May:
   Only the might of joy in love
Brake forth within him as a fire,
And deep delight in deep desire
Of far-flown days whose full-souled quire
   Rang round from the air above.

From choral earth and quiring air
Rang memories winged like songs that bear
Sweet gifts for spirit and sense to share:
For no manâs life knows love more fair
   And fruitful of memorial things
Than this the deep dear love that breaks
With sense of life on life, and makes
The sundawn sunnier as it wakes
   Where morning round it rings.

âO brother, O my brother!â cried
Each upon each, and cast aside
Their helms unbraced that might not hide
From sight of memory single-eyed
   The likeness graven of face and face,
And kissed and wept upon each other
For joy and pity of either brother,
And love engrafted by sire and mother,
   Godâs natural gift of grace.

And each with each took counsel meet
For comfort, making sorrow sweet,
And grief a goodly thing to greet:
And word from word leapt light and fleet
   Till all the venturous tale was told,
And how in Balenâs hope it lay
To meet the wild Welsh king and slay,
And win from Arthur back for pay
   The grace he gave of old.

âAnd thither will not thou with me
And win as great a grace for thee?â
âThat will I well,â quoth Balan: âwe
Will cleave together, bound and free,
   As brethren should, being twain and one.â
But ere they parted thence there came
A creature withered as with flame,
A dwarf mismade in natureâs shame,
   Between them and the sun.

And riding fleet as fire may glide
He found the dead lie side by side,
And wailed and rent his hair and cried,
âWho hath done this deed?â  And Balen eyed
   The strange thing loathfully, and said,
âThe knight I slew, who found him fain
And keen to slay me: seeing him slain,
The maid I sought to save in vain,
   Self-stricken, here lies dead.

âSore grief was mine to see her die,
And for her true faithâs sake shall I
Love, and with love of heart more high,
All women better till I die.â
   âAlas,â the dwarf said, âill for thee
In evil hour this deed was done:
For now the quest shall be begun
Against thee, from the dawning sun
   Even to the sunset sea.

âFrom shore to mountain, dawn to night,
The kinsfolk of this great dead knight
Will chase thee to thy death.â  A light
Of swift blithe scorn flashed answer bright
   As fire from Balenâs eye.  âFor that,
Small fear shall fret my heart,â quoth he:
âBut that my lord the king should be
For this dead manâs sake wroth with me,
   Weep might it well thereat.â

Then murmuring passed the dwarf away,
And toward the knights in fair array
Came riding eastward up the way
From where the flower-soft lowlands lay
   A king whose name the sweet south-west
Held high in honour, and the land
That bowed beneath his gentle hand
Wore on its wild bright northern strand
   Tintagel for a crest.

And Balen hailed with homage due
King Mark of Cornwall, when he knew
The pennon that before him flew:
And for those lovers dead and true
   The king made moan to hear their doom;
And for their sorrowâs sake he sware
To seek in all the marches there
The church that man might find most fair
   And build therein their tomb.



V


As thought from thought takes wing and flies,
As month on month with sunlit eyes
Tramples and triumphs in its rise,
As wave smites wave to death and dies,
   So chance on hurtling chance like steel
Strikes, flashes, and is quenched, ere fear
Can whisper hope, or hope can hear,
If sorrow or joy be far or near
   For time to hurt or heal.

Swift as a shadow and strange as light
That cleaves in twain the shadow of night
Before the wide-winged word takes flight
That thunder speaks to depth and height
   And quells the quiet hour with sound,
There came before King Mark and stood
Between the moorside and the wood
The man whose word Godâs will made good,
   Nor guile was in it found.

And Merlin said to Balen: âLo,
Thou hast wrought thyself a grievous woe
To let this lady die, and know
Thou mightst have stayed her deadly blow.â
   And Balen answered him and said,
âNay, by my truth to faith, not I,
So fiercely fain she was to die;
Ere well her sword had flashed on high,
   Self-slain she lay there dead.â

Again and sadly Merlin spake:
âMy heart is wrung for this deedâs sake,
To know thee therefore doomed to take
Upon thine hand a curse, and make
   Three kingdoms pine through twelve yearsâ change,
In want and woe: for thou shalt smite
The man most noble and truest knight
That looks upon the live worldâs light
   A dolorous stroke and strange.

âAnd not till years shall round their goal
May this manâs wound thou hast given be whole.â
And Balen, stricken through the soul
By dark-winged words of doom and dole,
   Made answer: âIf I wist it were
No lie but sooth thou sayest of me,
Then even to make a liar of thee
Would I too slay myself, and see
   How death bids dead men fare.â

And Merlin took his leave and passed
And was not: and the shadow as fast
Went with him that his word had cast,
Too fleet for thought thereof to last:
   And there those brethren bade King Mark
Farewell: but fain would Mark have known
The strong knightâs name who had overthrown
The pride of Launceor, when it shone
   Bright as it now lay dark.

And Balan for his brother spake,
Saying: âSir, albeit him list not break
The seal of secret time, nor shake
Night off him ere his morning wake,
   By these two swords he is girt withal
May men that praise him, knights and lords,
Call him the knight that bears two swords,
And all the praise his fame accords
   Make answer when they call.â

So parted they toward eventide;
And tender twilight, heavy-eyed,
Saw deep down glimmering woodlands ride
Balen and Balan side by side,
   Till where the leaves grew dense and dim
Again they spied from far draw near
The presence of the sacred seer,
But so disguised and strange of cheer
   That seeing they knew not him.

âNow whither ride ye,â Merlin said,
âThrough shadows that the sun strikes red,
Ere night be born or day be dead?â
But they, for doubt half touched with dread,
   Would say not where their goal might lie.
âAnd thou,â said Balen, âwhat art thou,
To walk with shrouded eye and brow?â
He said: âMe lists not show thee now
   By name what man am I.â

âIll seen is this of thee,â said they,
âThat thou art true in word and way
Nor fain to fear the face of day,
Who wilt not as a true man say
   The name it shames not him to bear.â
He answered: âBe it or be it not so,
Yet why ye ride this way I know,
To meet King Ryons as a foe,
   And how your hope shall fare.

âWell, if ye hearken toward my rede,
Ill, if ye hear not, shall ye speed.â
âAh, now,â they cried, âthou art ours at need
What Merlin saith we are fain to heed.â
   âGreat worship shall ye win,â said he,
âAnd look that ye do knightly now,
For great shall be your need, I trow.â
And Balen smiled: âBy knighthoodâs vow,
   The best we may will we.â

Then Merlin bade them turn and take
Rest, for their good steedsâ weary sake,
Between the highway and the brake,
Till starry midnight bade them wake:
   Then âRise,â he said, âthe king is nigh,
Who hath stolen from all his host away
With threescore horse in armed array,
The goodliest knights that bear his sway
   And hold his kingdom high.

âAnd twenty ride of them before
To bear his errand, ere the door
Turn of the night, sealed fast no more,
And sundawn bid the stars wax hoar;
   For by the starshine of to-night
He seeks a leman where she waits
His coming, dark and swift as fateâs,
And hearkens toward the unopening gates
   That yield not him to sight.

Then through the glimmering gloom around
A shadowy sense of light and sound
Made, ere the proof thereof were found,
The brave blithe hearts within them bound,
   And âWhere,â quoth Balen, ârides the king?â
But softer spake the seer: âAbide,
Till hither toward your spears he ride,
Where all the narrowing woodland side
   Grows dense with boughs that cling.â

There in that straitening way they met
The wild Welsh host against them set,
And smote their strong king down, ere yet
His hurrying horde of spears might get
   Fierce vantage of them.  Then the fight
Grew great and joyous as it grew,
For left and right those brethren slew,
Till all the lawn waxed red with dew
   More deep than dews of night.

And ere the full fierce tale was read
Full forty lay before them dead,
And fast the hurtling remnant fled
And wist not whither fear had led:
   And toward the king they went again,
And would have slain him: but he bowed
Before them, crying in fear aloud
For grace they gave him, seeing the proud
   Wild king brought lowest of men.

And ere the wildwood leaves were stirred
With song or wing of wakening bird,
In Camelot was Merlinâs word
With joy in joyous wonder heard
   That told of Arthurâs bitterest foe
Diskingdomed and discomfited.
âBy whom?â the high king smiled and said.
He answered: âEre the dawn wax red,
   To-morrow bids you know.

âTwo knights whose heart and hope are one
And fain to win your grace have done
This work whereby if grace be won
Their hearts shall hail the enkindling sun
   With joy more keen and deep than day.â
And ere the sundawn drank the dew
Those brethren with their prisoner drew
To the outer guard they gave him to
   And passed again away.

And Arthur came as toward his guest
To greet his foe, and bade him rest
As one returned from nobler quest
And welcome from the stormbright west,
   But by what chance he fain would hear.
âThe chance was hard and strange, sir king,â
Quoth Ryons, bowed in thanksgiving.
âWho won you?â Arthur said: âthe thing
   Is worth a warriorâs ear.â

The wild king flushed with pride and shame,
Answering: âI know not either name
Of those that there against us came
And withered all our strength like flame:
   The knight that bears two swords is one,
And one his brother: not on earth
May men meet men of knightlier worth
Nor mightier born of mortal birth
   That hail the sovereign sun.â

And Arthur said: âI know them not
But much am I for this, God wet,
Beholden to them: Launcelot
Nor Tristram, when the war waxed hot
   Along the marches east and west,
Wrought ever nobler work than this.â
âAh,â Merlin said, âsore pity it is
And strange mischance of doom, I wis,
   That death should mar their quest.

âBalen, the perfect knight that won
The sword whose name is malison,
And made his deed his doom, is one:
Nor hath his brother Balan done
   Less royal service: not on earth
Lives there a nobler knight, more strong
Of soul to win menâs praise in song,
Albeit the light abide not long
   That lightened round his birth.

âYea, and of all sad things I know
The heaviest and the highest in woe
Is this, the doom whose date brings low
Too soon in timeless overthrow
   A head so high, a hope so sure.
The greatest moan for any knight
That ever won fair fame in fight
Shall be for Balen, seeing his might
   Must now not long endure.â

âAlas,â King Arthur said, âhe hath shown
Such love to me-ward that the moan
Made of him should be mine alone
Above all other, knowing it known
   I have ill deserved it of him.â  âNay,â
Said Merlin, âhe shall do for you
Much more, when time shall be anew,
Than time hath given him chance to do
   Or hope may think to say.

âBut now must be your powers purveyed
To meet, ere noon of morn be made
To-morrow, all the host arrayed
Of this wild foeâs wild brother, laid
   Around against you: see to it well,
For now I part from you.â  And soon,
When sundawn slew the withering moon,
Two hosts were met to win the boon
   Whose tale is deathâs to tell.

A lordly tale of knights and lords
For death to tell by count of swords
When warâs wild harp in all its chords
Rang royal triumph, and the hordes
   Of hurtling foemen rocked and reeled
As waves wind-thwarted on the sea,
Was told of all that there might be,
Till scarce might battle hear or see
   The fortune of the field.

And many a knight won fame that day
When even the serpent soul of Kay
Was kindled toward the fiery play
As might a lionâs be for prey,
   And won him fame that might not die
With passing of his rancorous breath
But clung about his life and death
As fire that speaks in cloud, and saith
   What strong men hear and fly.

And glorious works were Arthurâs there,
That lit the battle-darkened air:
But when they saw before them fare
Like stars of storm the knight that bare
   Two swords about him girt for fray,
Balen, and Balan with him, then
Strong wonder smote the souls of men
If heavenâs own host or hellâs deep den
   Had sent them forth to slay.

So keen they rode across the fight,
So sharp they smote to left and right,
And made of hurtling darkness light
With lightning of their swords, till flight
   And fear before them flew like flame,
That Arthurâs self had never known,
He said, since first his blast was blown,
Such lords of war as these alone
   That whence he knew not came.

But while the fire of war waxed hot
The wild king hearkened, hearing not,
Through storm of spears and arrow-shot,
For succour toward him from King Lot
   And all his host of sea-born men,
Strong as the strong storm-baffling bird
Whose cry round Orkneyâs headlands heard
Is as the seaâs own sovereign word
   That mocks our mortal ken.

For Merlinâs craft of prophecy,
Who wist that one of twain must die,
Put might in him to say thereby
Which head should lose its crown, and lie
   Stricken, though loth he were to know
That either life should wane and fail;
Yet most might Arthurâs love avail,
And still with subtly tempered tale
   His wile held fast the foe.

With woven words of magic might
Wherein the subtle shadow and light
Changed hope and fear till fear took flight,
He stayed King Lotâs fierce lust of fight
   Till all the wild Welsh war was driven
As foam before the wind that wakes
With the all-awakening sun, and breaks
Strong ships that rue the mirth it makes
   When grace to slay is given.

And ever hotter lit and higher,
As fire that meets encountering fire,
Waxed in King Lot his keen desire
To bid revenge within him tire
   On Arthurâs ravaged fame and life:
Across the waves of war between
Floated and flashed, unseen and seen,
The lustrous likeness of the queen
   Whom shame had sealed his wife.

But when the woful word was brought
That while he tarried, doubting nought,
The hope was lost whose goal he sought
And all the fight he yearned for fought,
   His heart was rent for grief and shame,
And half his hope was set on flight
Till word was given him of a knight
Who said: âThey are weary and worn with fight,
   And we more fresh than flame.â

And bright and dark as night and day
Ere either find the unopening way
Clear, and forego the unaltering sway,
The sad kingâs face shone, frowning: âYea,
   I would that every knight of mine
Would do his part as I shall do,â
He said, âtill death or life anew
Shall judge between us as is due
   With wiser doom than thine.â

Then thundered all the awakening field
With crash of hosts that clashed and reeled,
Banner to banner, shield to shield,
And spear to splintering spear-shaft, steeled
   As heart against high heart of man,
As hope against high hope of knight
To pluck the crest and crown of fight
From warâs clenched hand by stormâs wild light,
   For blessing given or ban.

All hearts of hearkening men that heard
The ban twin-born with blessing, stirred
Like springtide waters, knew the word
Whereby the steeds of storm are spurred
   With ravenous rapture to destroy,
And laughed for love of battle, pierced
With passion of tempestuous thirst
And hungering hope to assuage it first
   With draughts of stormy joy.

But sheer ahead of the iron tide
That rocked and roared from side to side
Rode as the lightningâs lord might ride
King Lot, whose heart was set to abide
   All peril of the raging hour,
And all his host of warriors born
Where lands by warring seas are worn
Was only by his hands upborne
   Who gave them pride and power.

But as the seaâs hand smites the shore
And shatters all the strengths that bore
The ravage earth may bear no more,
So smote the hand of Pellinore
   Charging, a knight of Arthurâs chief,
And clove his strong steedâs neck in twain,
And smote him sheer through brow and brain,
Falling: and there King Lot lay slain,
   And knew not wrath or grief.

And all the host of Orkney fled,
And many a motherâs son lay dead:
But when they raised the stricken head
Whence pride and power and shame were fled
   And rage and anguish now cast out,
And bore it toward a kingly tomb,
The wife whose love had wrought his doom
Came thither, fair as morningâs bloom
   And dark as twilightâs doubt.

And there her four strong sons and his,
Gawain and Gareth, Gaherys
And Agravain, whose swordâs sharp kiss
With sound of hellâs own serpentâs hiss
   Should one day turn her life to death,
Stood mourning with her: but by these
Seeing Mordred as a seer that sees,
Anguish of terror bent her knees
   And caught her shuddering breath.

The splendour of her sovereign eyes
Flashed darkness deeper than the skies
Feel or fear when the sunset dies
On his that felt as midnight rise
   Their doom upon them, there undone
By faith in fear ere thought could yield
A shadowy sense of days revealed,
The ravin of the final field,
   The terror of their son.

For Arthurâs, as they caught the light
That sought and durst not seek his sight,
Darkened, and all his spiritâs might
Withered within him even as night
   Withers when sunrise thrills the sea.
But Mordredâs lightened as with fire
That smote his mother and his sire
With darkling doom and deep desire
   That bade its darkness be.

And heavier on their hearts the weight
Sank of the fear that brings forth fate,
The bitter doubt whose womb is great
With all the grief and love and hate
   That turn to fire menâs days on earth.
And glorious was the funeral made,
And dark the deepening dread that swayed
Their darkening souls whose light grew shade
   With sense of death in birth.



VI


In autumn, when the wind and sea
Rejoice to live and laugh to be,
And scarce the blast that curbs the tree
And bids before it quail and flee
   The fiery foliage, where its brand
Is radiant as the seal of spring,
Sounds less delight, and waves a wing
Less lustrous, lifeâs loud thanksgiving
   Puts life in sea and land.

High hope in Balenâs heart alight
Laughed, as from all that clamorous fight
He passed and sought not Arthurâs sight,
Who fain had found his kingliest knight
   And made amend for Balenâs wrong.
But Merlin gave his soul to see
Fate, rising as a shoreward sea,
And all the sorrow that should be
   Ere hope or fear thought long.

âO where are they whose hands upbore
My battle,â Arthur said, âbefore
The wild Welsh hostâs wide rage and roar?
Balen and Balan, Pellinore,
   Where are they?â  Merlin answered him:
âBalen shall be not long away
From sight of you, but night nor day
Shall bring his brother back to say
   If life burn bright or dim.â

âNow, by my faith,â said Arthur then,
âTwo marvellous knights are they, whose ken
Toward battle makes the twain as ten,
And Balen most of all born men
   Passeth of prowess all I know
Or ever found or sought to see:
Would God he would abide with me,
To face the times foretold of thee
   And all the latter woe.â

For there had Merlin shown the king
The doom that songs unborn should sing,
The gifts that time should rise and bring
Of blithe and bitter days to spring
   As weeds and flowers against the sun.
And on the king for fearâs sake fell
Sickness, and sorrow deep as hell,
Nor even might sleep bid fear farewell
   If grace to sleep were won.

Down in a meadow green and still
He bade the folk that wrought his will
Pitch his pavilion, where the chill
Soft night would let not rest fulfil
   His heart wherein dark fears lay deep.
And sharp against his hearing cast
Came a sound as of horsehoofs fast
Passing, that ere their sound were past
   Aroused him as from sleep.

And forth he looked along the grass
And saw before his portal pass
A knight that wailed aloud, âAlas
That life should find this dolorous pass
   And find no shield from doom and dole!â
And hearing all his moan, âAbide,
Fair sir,â the king arose and cried,
âAnd say what sorrow bids you ride
   So sorrowful of soul.â

âMy hurt may no man heal, God wot,
And help of man may speed me not,â
The sad knight said, ânor change my lot.â
And toward the castle of Melyot
   Whose towers arose a league away
He passed forth sorrowing: and anon,
Ere well the woful sight were gone,
Came Balen down the meads that shone,
   Strong, bright, and brave as day.

And seeing the king there stand, the knight
Drew rein before his face to alight
In reverence made for loveâs sake bright
With joy that set his face alight
   As theirs who see, alive, above,
The sovereign of their souls, whose name
To them is even as loveâs own flame
To enkindle hope that heeds not fame
   And knows no lord but love.

And Arthur smiled on him, and said,
âRight welcome be thou: by my head,
I would not wish me better sped.
For even but now there came and fled
   Before me like a cloud that flies
A knight that made most heavy cheer,
I know not wherefore; nor may fear
Or pity give my heart to hear
   Or lighten on mine eyes.

âBut even for fearâs and pityâs sake
Fain were I thou shouldst overtake
And fetch again this knight that spake
No word of answering grace to make
   Reply to mine that hailed him: thou,
By force or by goodwill, shalt bring
His face before me.â  âYea, my king,â
Quoth Balen, âand a greater thing
   Were less than is my vow.

âI would the task required and heard
Were heavier than your sovereign word
Hath laid on me:â and thence he spurred
Elate at heart as youth, and stirred
   With hope as blithe as fires a boy:
And many a mile he rode, and found
Far in a forestâs glimmering bound
The man he sought afar around
   And seeing took fire for joy.

And with him went a maiden, fair
As flowers aflush with April air.
And Balen bade him turn him there
To tell the king what woes they were
   That bowed him down so sore: and he
Made woeful answer: âThis should do
Great scathe to me, with nought for you
Of help that hope might hearken to
   For boot that may not be.â

And Balen answered: âI were loth
To fight as one perforce made wroth
With one that owes by knighthoodâs oath
One love, one service, and one troth
   With me to him whose gracious hand
Holds fast the helm of knighthood here
Whereby manâs hope and heart may steer:
I pray you let not sorrow or fear
   Against his bidding stand.â

The strange knight gazed on him, and spake:
âWill you, for Arthurâs royal sake,
Be warrant for me that I take
No scathe from strife that man may make?
   Then will I go with you.â  And he
Made joyous answer: âYea, for I
Will be your warrant or will die.â
And thence they rode with hearts as high
   As menâs that search the sea.

And as by noonâs large light the twain
Before the tented hall drew rein,
Suddenly fell the strange knight, slain
By one that came and went again
   And none might see him; but his spear
Clove through the body, swift as fire,
The man whose doom, forefelt as dire,
Had darkened all his lifeâs desire,
   As one that death held dear.

And dying he turned his face and said,
âLo now thy warrant that my head
Should fall not, following forth where led
A knight whose pledge hath left me dead.
   This darkling manslayer hath to name
Garlon: take thou my goodlier steed,
Seeing thine is less of strength and speed,
And ride, if thou be knight indeed,
   Even thither whence we came.

âAnd as the maidenâs fair behest
Shall bid you follow on my quest,
Follow: and when Godâs will sees best,
Revenge my death, and let me rest
   As one that lived and died a knight,
Unstained of shame alive or dead.â
And Balen, wrung with sorrow, said,
âThat shall I do: my hand and head
   I pledge to do you right.â

And thence with sorrowing heart and cheer
He rode, in grief that cast out fear
Lest death in darkness yet were near,
And bore the truncheon of the spear
   Wherewith the woful knight lay slain
To her with whom he rode, and she
Still bare it with her, fain to see
What righteous doom of Godâs might be
   The darkling manslayerâs bane.

And down a dim deep woodland way
They rode between the boughs asway
With flickering winds whose flash and play
Made sunlight sunnier where the day
   Laughed, leapt, and fluttered like a bird
Caught in a light loose leafy net
That earth for amorous heaven had set
To hold and see the sundawn yet
   And hear what morning heard.

There in the sweet soft shifting light
Across their passage rode a knight
Flushed hot from hunting as from fight,
And seeing the sorrow-stricken sight
   Made question of them why they rode
As mourners sick at heart and sad,
When all alive about them bade
Sweet earth for heavenâs sweet sake be glad
   As heaven for earthâs love glowed.

âMe lists not tell you,â Balen said.
The strange knightâs face grew keen and red
âNow, might my hand but keep my head,
Even here should one of twain lie dead
   Were he no better armed than I.â
And Balen spake with smiling speed,
Where scorn and courtesy kept heed
Of either: âThat should little need:
   Not here shall either die.â

And all the cause he told him through
As one that feared not though he knew
All: and the strange knight spake anew,
Saying: âI will part no more from you
   While life shall last me.â  So they went
Where he might arm himself to ride,
And rode across wild ways and wide
To where against a churchyard side
   A hermitâs harbour leant.

And there against them riding came
Fleet as the lightningâs laugh and flame
The invisible evil, even the same
They sought and might not curse by name
   As hellâs foul child on earth set free,
And smote the strange knight through, and fled,
And left the mourners by the dead.
âAlas, again,â Sir Balen said,
   âThis wrong he hath done to me.â

And there they laid their dead to sleep
Royally, lying where wild winds keep
Keen watch and wail more soft and deep
Than where menâs choirs bid music weep
   And song like incense heave and swell.
And forth again they rode, and found
Before them, dire in sight and sound,
A castle girt about and bound
   With sorrow like a spell.

Above it seemed the sun at noon
Sad as a wintry withering moon
That shudders while the waste windâs tune
Craves ever none may guess what boon,
   But all may know the boon for dire.
And evening on its darkness fell
More dark than very deathâs farewell,
And night about it hung like hell,
   Whose fume the dawn made fire.

And Balen lighted down and passed
Within the gateway, whence no blast
Rang as the sheer portcullis, cast
Suddenly down, fell, and made fast
   The gate behind him, whence he spied
A sudden rage of men without
And ravin of a murderous rout
That girt the maiden hard about
   With death on either side.

And seeing that shame and peril, fear
Bade wrath and grief awake and hear
What shame should say in fameâs wide ear
If she, by sorrow sealed more dear
   Than joy might make her, so should die:
And up the towerâs curled stair he sprang
As one that flies deathâs deadliest fang,
And leapt right out amid their gang
   As fire from heaven on high.

And they thereunder seeing the knight
Unhurt among their press alight
And bare his sword for chance of fight
Stood from him, loth to strive or smite,
   And bade him hear their woful word,
That not the maidenâs death they sought;
But there through years too dire for thought
Had lain their lady stricken, and nought
   Might heal her: and he heard.

For there a maiden clean and whole
In virgin body and virgin soul,
Whose name was writ on royal roll,
That would but stain a silver bowl
   With offering of her stainless blood,
Therewith might heal her: so they stayed
For hopeâs sad sake each blameless maid
There journeying in that dolorous shade
   Whose bloom was bright in bud.

No hurt nor harm to her it were
If she should yield a sister there
Some tribute of her blood, and fare
Forth with this joy at heart to bear,
   That all unhurt and unafraid
This grace she had here by Godâs grace wrought.
And kindling all with kindly thought
And love that saw save loveâs self nought,
   Shone, smiled, and spake the maid.

âGood knight of mine, good will have I
To help this healing though I die.â
âNay,â Balen said, âbut love may try
What help in living love may lie.
  âI will not lose the life of her
While my life lasteth.â  So she gave
The tribute love was fain to crave,
But might not heal though fain to save,
   Were Godâs grace helpfuller.

Another maid in later Mays
Won with her life that woful praise,
And died.  But they, when surging dayâs
Deep tide fulfilled the dawnâs wide ways,
   Rode forth, and found by day or night
No chance to cross their wayfaring
Till when they saw the fourth day spring
A knightâs hall gave them harbouring
   Rich as a kingâs house might.

And while they sat at meat and spake
Words bright and kind as grace might make
Sweet for true knighthoodâs kindly sake,
They heard a cry beside them break
   The still-souled joy of blameless rest.
âWhat noise is this?â quoth Balen.  âNay,â
His knightly host made answer, âmay
Our grief not grieve you though I say
   How here I dwell unblest.

âNot many a day has lived and died
Since at a tournay late I tried
My strength to smite and turn and ride
Against a knight of kinglike pride,
   King Pellamâs brother: twice I smote
The splendour of his strength to dust:
And he, fulfilled of hateâs fierce lust,
Swore vengeance, pledged for hell to trust,
   And keen as hellâs wide throat.

âInvisible as the spirit of night
That heaven and earth in depth and height
May see not by the mild moonâs light
Nor even when stars would grant them sight,
   He walks and slays as plagueâs blind breath
Slays: and my son, whose anguish here
Makes moan perforce that mars our cheer,
He wounded, even ere love might fear
   That hate were strong as death.

âNor may my son be whole till he
Whose stroke through him hath stricken me
Shall give again his blood to be
Our healing: yet may no man see
   This felon, clothed with darkness round
And keen as lightningâs life.â  Thereon
Spake Balen, and his presence shone
Even as the sunâs when stars are gone
   That hear dawnâs trumpet sound.

âThat knight I know: two knights of mine,
Two comrades, sealed by faithâs bright sign,
Whose eyes as ours that live should shine,
And drink the golden sunlightâs wine
   With joyâs thanksgiving that they live,
He hath slain in even the same blind wise:
Were all wide wealth beneath the skies
Mine, might I meet him, eyes on eyes,
   All would I laugh to give.â

His host made answer, and his gaze
Grew bright with trust as dawnâs moist maze
With fire: âWithin these twenty days,
King Pellam, lord of Lystenayse,
   Holds feast through all this country cried,
And there before the knightly king
May no knight come except he bring
For witness of his wayfaring
   His paramour or bride.

âAnd there that day, so soon to shine,
This knight, your felon foe and mine,
Shall show, full-flushed with bloodred wine,
The fierce false face whereon we pine
   To wreak the wrong he hath wrought us, bare
As shame should see and brand it.â  âThen,â
Said Balen, âshall he give again
His blood to heal your son, and men
   Shall see death blind him there.â

âForth will we fare to-morrow,â said
His host: and forth, as sunrise led,
They rode; and fifteen days were fled
Ere toward their goal their steeds had sped.
   And there alighting might they find
For Balenâs host no place to rest,
Who came without a gentler guest
Beside him: and that householdâs hest
   Bade leave his sword behind.

âNay,â Balen said, âthat do I not:
My countryâs custom stands, God wot,
That none whose lot is knighthoodâs lot,
To ride where chance as fire is hot
   With hope or promise given of fight,
Shall fail to keep, for knighthoodâs part,
His weapon with him as his heart;
And as I came will I depart,
   Or hold herein my right.â

Then gat he leave to wear his sword
Beside the strange kingâs festal board
Where feasted many a knight and lord
In seemliness of fair accord:
   And Balen asked of one beside,
âIs there not in this court, if fame
Keep faith, a knight that hath to name
Garlon?â and saying that word of shame,
   He scanned that place of pride.

âYonder he goeth against the light,
He with the face as swart as night,â
Quoth the other: âbut he rides to fight
Hid round by charms from all menâs sight,
   And many a noble knight he hath slain,
Being wrapt in darkness deep as hell
And silence dark as shame.â  âAh, well,â
Said Balen, âis that he? the spell
   May be the sorcererâs bane.â

Then Balen gazed upon him long,
And thought, âIf here I wreak my wrong,
Alive I may not scape, so strong
The felonâs friends about him throng;
   And if I leave him here alive,
This chance perchance may life not give
Again: much evil, if he live,
He needs must do, should fear forgive
   When wrongs bid strike and strive.â

And Garlon, seeing how Balenâs eye
Dwelt on him as his heart waxed high
With joy in wrath to see him nigh,
Rose wolf-like with a wolfish cry
   And crossed and smote him on the face,
Saying, âKnight, what wouldst thou with me?  Eat,
For shame, and gaze not: eat thy meat
Do that thou art come for: stands thy seat
   Next ours of royal race?â

âWell hast thou said: thy rede rings true;
That which I came for will I do,â
Quoth Balen: forth his fleet sword flew,
And clove the head of Garlon through
   Clean to the shoulders.  Then he cried
Loud to his lady, âGive me here
The truncheon of the shameful spear
Wherewith he slew your knight, when fear
   Bade hate in darkness ride.â

And gladly, bright with grief made glad,
She gave the truncheon as he bade,
For still she bare it with her, sad
And strong in hopeless hope she had,
   Through all dark days of thwarting fear,
To see if doom should fall aright
And as Godâs fire-fraught thunder smite
That head, clothed round with hell-faced night,
   Bare now before her here.

And Balen smote therewith the dead
Dark felonâs body through, and said
Aloud, âWith even this truncheon, red
With baser blood than brave men bled
   Whom in thy shameful hand it slew,
Thou hast slain a nobler knight, and now
It clings and cleaves thy body: thou
Shall cleave again no brave manâs brow,
   Though hell would aid anew.â

And toward his host he turned and spake;
âNow for your sonâs long-suffering sake
Blood ye may fetch enough, and take
Wherewith to heal his hurt, and make
   Death warm as life.â  Then rose a cry
Loud as the windâs when stormy spring
Makes all the woodland rage and ring:
âThou hast slain my brother,â said the king,
   âAnd here with him shalt die.â

âAy?â Balen laughed him answer.  âWell,
Do it then thyself.â  And the answer fell
Fierce as a blast of hate from hell,
âNo man of mine that with me dwell
   Shall strike at thee but I their lord
For love of this my brother slain.â
And Pellam caught and grasped amain
A grim great weapon, fierce and fain
   To feed his hungering sword.

And eagerly he smote, and sped
Not well: for Balenâs blade, yet red
With lifeblood of the murderous dead,
Between the swordstroke and his head
   Shone, and the strength of the eager stroke
Shore it in sunder: then the knight,
Naked and weaponless for fight,
Ran seeking him a sword to smite
   As hope within him woke.

And so their flight for deathward fast
From chamber forth to chamber passed
Where lay no weapon, till the last
Whose doors made way for Balen cast
   Upon him as a sudden spell
Wonder that even as lightning leapt
Across his heart and eyes, and swept
As storm across his soul that kept
   Wild watch, and watched not well.

For there the deed he did, being near
Deathâs danger, breathless as the deer
Driven hard to bay, but void of fear,
Brought sorrow down for many a year
   On many a man in many a land.
All glorious shone that chamber, bright
As burns at sunrise heavenâs own height:
With cloth of gold the bed was dight,
   That flamed on either hand.

And one he saw within it lie:
A table of all clear gold thereby
Stood stately, fair as morningâs eye,
With four strong silver pillars, high
   And firm as faith and hope may be:
And on it shone the gift he sought,
A spear most marvellously wrought,
That when his eye and handgrip caught
   Small fear at heart had he.

Right on King Pellam then, as fire
Turns when the thwarting winds wax higher,
He turned, and smote him down.  So dire
The stroke was, when his heartâs desire
   Struck, and had all its fill of hate,
That as the king fell swooning down
Fell the walls, rent from base to crown,
Prone as prone seas that break and drown
   Ships fraught with doom for freight.

And there for three daysâ silent space
Balen and Pellam face to face
Lay dead or deathlike, and the place
Was deathâs blind kingdom, till the grace
   That God had given the sacred seer
For counsel or for comfort led
His Merlin thither, and he said,
Standing between the quick and dead,
   âRise up, and rest not here.â

And Balen rose and set his eyes
Against the seerâs as one that tries
His heart against the seaâs and skyâs
And fears not if he lives or dies,
   Saying, âI would have my damosel,
Ere I fare forth, to fare with me.â
And sadly Merlin answered, âSee
Where now she lies; death knows if she
   Shall now fare ill or well.

âAnd in this world we meet no more,
Balen.â  And Balen, sorrowing sore,
Though fearless yet the heart he bore
Beat toward the life that lay before,
   Rode forth through many a wild waste land
Where men cried out against him, mad
With grievous faith in fear that bade
Their wrath make moan for doubt they had
   Lest hell had armed his hand.

For in that chamberâs wondrous shrine
Was part of Christâs own blood, the wine
Shed of the true triumphal vine
Whose growth bids earthâs deep darkness shine
   As heavenâs deep light through the air and sea;
That mystery toward our northern shore
Arimathean Joseph bore
For healing of our sins of yore,
   That grace even there might be.

And with that spear there shrined apart
Was Christâs side smitten to the heart.
And fiercer than the lightningâs dart
The stroke was, and the deathlike smart
   Wherewith, nigh drained of blood and breath,
The king lay stricken as one long dead:
And Josephâs was the blood there shed,
For near akin was he that bled,
   Near even as life to death.

And therefore fell on all that land
Sorrow: for still on either hand,
As Balen rode alone and scanned
Bright fields and cities built to stand
   Till time should break them, dead men lay;
And loud and long from all their folk
Living, one cry that cursed him broke;
Three countries had his dolorous stroke
   Slain, or should surely slay.



VII


In winter, when the year burns low
As fire wherein no firebrands glow,
And winds dishevel as they blow
The lovely stormy wings of snow,
   The hearts of northern men burn bright
With joy that mocks the joy of spring
To hear all heavenâs keen clarions ring
Music that bids the spirit sing
   And day give thanks for night.

Aloud and dark as hell or hate
Round Balenâs head the wind of fate
Blew storm and cloud from deathâs wide gate:
But joy as grief in him was great
   To face Godâs doom and live or die,
Sorrowing for ill wrought unaware,
Rejoicing in desire to dare
All ill that innocence might bear
   With changeless heart and eye.

Yet passing fain he was when past
Those lands and woes at length and last.
Eight times, as thence he fared forth fast,
Dawn rose and even was overcast
   With starry darkness dear as day,
Before his venturous quest might meet
Adventure, seeing within a sweet
Green low-lying forest, hushed in heat,
   A tower that barred his way.

Strong summer, dumb with rapture, bound
With golden calm the woodlands round
Wherethrough the knight forth faring found
A knight that on the greenwood ground
   Sat mourning: fair he was to see,
And moulded as for love or fight
A maidenâs dreams might frame her knight;
But sad in joyâs far-flowering sight
   As griefâs blind thrall might be.

âGod save you,â Balen softly said,
âWhat grief bows down your heart and head
Thus, as one sorrowing for his dead?
Tell me, if haply I may stead
   In aught your sorrow, that I may.â
âSir knight,â that other said, âthy word
Makes my grief heavier that I heard.â
And pity and wonder inly stirred
   Drew Balen thence away.

And so withdrawn with silent speed
He saw the sad knightâs stately steed,
A war-horse meet for warriorâs need,
That none who passed might choose but heed,
   So strong he stood, so great, so fair,
With eyes afire for flight or fight,
A joy to look on, mild in might,
And swift and keen and kind as light,
   And all as clear of care.

And Balen, gazing on him, heard
Again his masterâs woful word
Sound sorrow through the calm unstirred
By fluttering wind or flickering bird,
   Thus: âAh, fair lady and faithless, why
Break thy pledged faith to meet me? soon
An hour beyond thy trothplight noon
Shall strike my death-bell, and thy boon
   Is this, that here I die.

âMy curse for all thy gifts may be
Heavier than death or night on thee;
For now this sword thou gavest me
Shall set me from thy bondage free.â
   And there the man had died self-slain,
But Balen leapt on him and caught
The blind fierce hand that fain had wrought
Self-murder, stung with fire of thought,
   As rage makes anguish fain.

Then, mad for thwarted grief, âLet go
My hand,â the fool of wrath and woe
Cried, âor I slay thee.â  Scarce the glow
In Balenâs cheek and eye might show,
   As dawn shows day while seas lie chill,
He heard, though pity took not heed,
But smiled and spake, âThat shall not need:
What man may do to bid you speed
   I, so God speed me, will.â

And the other craved his name, beguiled
By hope that made his madness mild.
Again Sir Balen spake and smiled:
âMy name is Balen, called the Wild
   By knights whom kings and courts make tame
Because I ride alone afar
And follow but my soul for star.â
âAh, sir, I know the knight you are
   And all your fiery fame.

âThe knight that bears two swords I know,
Most praised of all men, friend and foe,
For prowess of your hands, that show
Dark war the way where balefires glow
   And kindle glory like the dawnâs.â
So spake the sorrowing knight, and stood
As one whose heart fresh hope made good:
And forth they rode by wold and wood
   And down the glimmering lawns.

And Balen craved his name who rode
Beside him, where the wild wood glowed
With joy to feel how noontide flowed
Through glade and glen and rough green road
   Till earth grew joyful as the sea.
âMy name is Garnysshe of the Mount,
A poor manâs son of none account,â
He said, âwhere springs of loftier fount
   Laugh loud with pride to be.

âBut strength in weakness lives and stands
As rocks that rise through shifting sands;
And for the prowess of my hands
One made me knight and gave me lands,
   Duke Hermel, lord from far to near,
Our prince; and she that loved meâshe
I love, and deemed she loved but me,
His daughter, pledged her faith to be
   Ere now beside me here.â

And Balen, brief of speech as light
Whose word, beheld of depth and height,
Strikes silence through the stars of night,
Spake, and his face as dawnâs grew bright,
   For hope to help a happier man,
âHow far then lies she hence?â  âBy this,â
Her lover sighed and said, âI wis,
Not six fleet miles the passage is,
   And straight as thought could span.â

So rode they swift and sure, and found
A castle walled and dyked around:
And Balen, as a warrior bound
On search where hope might fear to sound
   The darkness of the deeps of doubt,
Made entrance through the guardless gate
As life, while hope in life grows great,
Makes way between the doors of fate
   That death may pass thereout.

Through many a glorious chamber, wrought
For all delight that loveâs own thought
Might dream or dwell in, Balen sought
And found of all he looked for nought,
   For like a shining shell her bed
Shone void and vacant of her: thence
Through devious wonders bright and dense
He passed and saw with shame-struck sense
   Where shame and faith lay dead.

Down in a sweet small garden, fair
With flowerful joy in the ardent air,
He saw, and raged with loathing, where
She lay with love-dishevelled hair
   Beneath a broad bright laurel tree
And clasped in amorous arms a knight,
The unloveliest that his scornful sight
Had dwelt on yet; a shame the bright
   Broad noon might shrink to see.

And thence in wrathful hope he turned,
Hot as the heart within him burned,
To meet the knight whose love, so spurned
And spat on and made nought of, yearned
   And dreamed and hoped and lived in vain,
And said, âI have found her sleeping fast,â
And led him where the shadows cast
From leaves wherethrough light winds ran past
   Screened her from sun and rain.

But Garnysshe, seeing, reeled as he stood
Like a tree, kingliest of the wood,
Half hewn through: and the burning blood
Through lips and nostrils burst aflood:
   And gathering back his rage and might
As broken breakers rally and roar
The loud wind down that drives off shore,
He smote their heads off: there no more
   Their life might shame the light.

Then turned he back toward Balen, mad
With grief, and said, âThe grief I had
Was nought: ere this my life was glad:
Thou hast done this deed: I was but sad
   And fearful how my hope might fare:
I had lived my sorrow down, hadst thou
Not shown me what I saw but now.â
The sorrow and scorn on Balenâs brow
   Bade silence curb him there.

And Balen answered: âWhat I did
I did to hearten thee and bid
Thy courage know that shame should rid
A manâs high heart of love that hid
   Blind shame within its core: God knows,
I did, to set a bondman free,
But as I would thou hadst done by me,
That seeing what love must die to see
   Loveâs end might well be woeâs.â

âAlas,â the woful weakling said,
âI have slain what most I loved: I have shed
The blood most near my heart: the head
Lies cold as earth, defiled and dead,
   That all my life was lighted by,
That all my soul bowed down before,
And now may bear with life no more:
For now my sorrow that I bore
   Is twofold, and I die.â

Then with his red wet sword he rove
His breast in sunder, where it clove
Life, and no pulse against it strove,
So sure and strong the deep stroke drove
   Deathward: and Balen, seeing him dead,
Rode thence, lest folk would say he had slain
Those three; and ere three days again
Had seen the sunâs might wax and wane,
   Far forth he had spurred and sped.

And riding past a cross whereon
Broad golden letters written shone,
Saying, âNo knight born may ride alone
Forth toward this castle,â and all the stone
   Glowed in the sunâs glare even as though
Blood stained it from the crucified
Dead burden of one that there had died,
An old hoar man he saw beside
   Whose face was wan as woe.

âBalen the Wild,â he said, âthis way
Thy way lies not: thou hast passed to-day
Thy bands: but turn again, and stay
Thy passage, while thy soul hath sway
   Within thee, and through Godâs good power
It will avail thee:â and anon
His likeness as a cloud was gone,
And Balenâs heart within him shone
   Clear as the cloudless hour.

Nor fate nor fear might overcast
The soul now near its peace at last.
Suddenly, thence as forth he past,
A mighty and a deadly blast
   Blown of a hunting-horn he heard,
As when the chase hath nobly sped.
âThat blast is blown for me,â he said,
âThe prize am I who am yet not dead,â
   And smiled upon the word.

As toward a royal hartâs death rang
That note, whence all the loud wood sang
With winged and living sound that sprang
Like fire, and keen as fireâs own fang
   Pierced the sweet silence that it slew.
But nought like death or strife was here:
Fair semblance and most goodly cheer
They made him, they whose troop drew near
   As death among them drew.

A hundred ladies well arrayed
And many a knight well weaponed made
That kindly show of cheer: the glade
Shone round them till its very shade
   Lightened and laughed from grove to lawn
To hear and see them: so they brought
Within a castle fair as thought
Could dream that wizard hands had wrought
   The guest among them drawn.

All manner of glorious joy was there:
Harping and dancing, loud and fair,
And minstrelsy that made of air
Fire, so like fire its raptures were.
   Then the chief lady spake on high:
âKnight with the two swords, one of two
Must help you here or fall from you:
For needs you now must have ado
   And joust with one hereby.

âA good knight guards an island here
Against all swords that chance brings near,
And there with stroke of sword and spear
Must all for whom these halls make cheer
   Fight, and redeem or yield up life.â
âAn evil custom,â Balen said,
âIs this, that none whom chance hath led
Hither, if knighthood crown his head,
   May pass unstirred to strife.â

âYou shall not have ado to fight
Here save against one only knight,â
She said, and all her face grew bright
As hell-fire, lit with hungry light
   That wicked laughter touched with flame.
âWell, since I shall thereto,â said he,
âI am ready at heart as death for me:
Fain would I be where death should be
   And life should lose its name.

âBut travelling men whose goal afar
Shines as a cloud-constraining star
Are often weary, and wearier are
Their steeds that feel each fret and jar
   Wherewith the wild ways wound them: yet,
Albeit my horse be weary, still
My heart is nowise weary; will
Sustains it even till death fulfil
   My trust upon him set.â

âSir,â said a knight thereby that stood,
âMeseems your shield is now not good
But worn with warrior work, nor could
Sustain in strife the strokes it would:
   A larger will I lend you.â  âAy,
Thereof I thank you,â Balen said,
Being single of heart as one that read
No face aright whence faith had fled,
   Nor dreamed that faith could fly.

And so he took that shield unknown
And left for treasonâs touch his own,
And toward that island rode alone,
Nor heard the blast against him blown
   Sound in the windâs and waterâs sound,
But hearkening toward the streamâs edge heard
Nought save the soft streamâs rippling word,
Glad with the gladness of a bird,
   That sang to the air around.

And there against the water-side
He saw, fast moored to rock and ride,
A fair great boat anear abide
Like one that waits the turning tide,
   Wherein embarked his horse and he
Passed over toward no kindly strand:
And where they stood again on land
There stood a maiden hard at hand
   Who seeing them wept to see.

And âO knight Balen,â was her cry,
âWhy have ye left your own shield? why
Come hither out of time to die?
For had ye kept your shield, thereby
   Ye had yet been known, and died not here.
Great pity it is of you this day
As ever was of knight, or may
Be ever, seeing in warâs bright way
   Praise knows not Balenâs peer.â

And Balen said, âThou hast heard my name
Right: it repenteth me, though shame
May tax me not with base menâs blame,
That ever, hap what will, I came
   Within this country; yet, being come,
For shame I may not turn again
Now, that myself and nobler men
May scorn me: now is more than then,
   And faith bids fear be dumb.

âBe it life or death, my chance I take,
Be it lifeâs to build or deathâs to break:
And fall what may, me lists not make
Moan for sad lifeâs or deathâs sad sake.â
   Then looked he on his armour, glad
And high of heart, and found it strong:
And all his soul became a song
And soared in prayer that soared not long,
   For all the hope it had.

Then saw he whence against him came
A steed whose trappings shone like flame,
And he that rode him showed the same
Fierce colour, bright as fire or fame,
   But dark the visors were as night
That hid from Balen Balanâs face,
And his from Balan: Godâs own grace
Forsook them for a shadowy space
   Where darkness cast out light.

The two swords girt that Balen bare
Gave Balan for a breathâs while there
Pause, wondering if indeed it were
Balen his brother, bound to dare
   The chance of that unhappy quest:
But seeing not as he thought to see
His shield, he deemed it was not he,
And so, as fate bade sorrow be,
   They laid their spears in rest.

So mighty was the course they ran
With spear to spear so great of span,
Each fell back stricken, man by man,
Horse by horse, borne down: so the ban
   That wrought by doom against them wrought:
But Balen by his falling steed
Was bruised the sorer, being indeed
Way-weary, like a rain-bruised reed,
   With travel ere he fought.

And Balen rose again from swoon
First, and went toward him: all too soon
He too then rose, and the evil boon
Of strength came back, and the evil tune
   Of battle unnatural made again
Mad music as for deathâs wide ear
Listening and hungering toward the near
Last sigh that life or death might hear
   At last from dying men.

Balan smote Balen first, and clove
His lifted shield that rose and strove
In vain against the stroke that drove
Down: as the web that morning wove
   Of glimmering pearl from spray to spray
Dies when the strong sun strikes it, so
Shrank the steel, tempered thrice to show
Strength, as the mad might of the blow
   Shore Balenâs helm away.

Then turning as a turning wave
Against the land-wind, blind and brave
In hope that dreams despair may save,
With even the unhappy sword that gave
   The gifts of fame and fate in one
He smote his brother, and there had nigh
Felled him: and while they breathed, his eye
Glanced up, and saw beneath the sky
   Sights fairer than the sun.

The towers of all the castle there
Stood full of ladies, blithe and fair
As the earth beneath and the amorous air
About them and above them were:
   So toward the blind and fateful fight
Again those brethren went, and sore
Were all the strokes they smote and bore,
And breathed again, and fell once more
   To battle in their sight.

With blood that either spilt and bled
Was all the ground they fought on red,
And each knightâs hauberk hewn and shred
Left each unmailed and naked, shed
   From off them even as mantles cast:
And oft they breathed, and drew but breath
Brief as the word strong sorrow saith,
And poured and drank the draught of death,
   Till fate was full at last.

And Balan, younger born than he
Whom darkness bade him slay, and be
Slain, as in mist where none may see
If aught abide or fall or flee,
   Drew back a little and laid him down,
Dying: but Balen stood, and said,
As one between the quick and dead
Might stand and speak, âWhat good knightâs head
   Hath won this mortal crown?

âWhat knight art thou? for never I
Who now beside thee dead shall die
Found yet the knight afar or nigh
That matched me.â  Then his brotherâs eye
   Flashed pride and love; he spake and smiled
And felt in death lifeâs quickening flame,
And answered: âBalan is my name,
The good knight Balenâs brother; fame
   Calls and miscalls him wild.â

The cry from Balenâs lips that sprang
Sprang sharper than his swordâs stroke rang.
More keen than deathâs or memoryâs fang,
Through sense and soul the shuddering pang
   Shivered: and scarce he had cried, âAlas
That ever I should see this day,â
When sorrow swooned from him away
As blindly back he fell, and lay
   Where sleep lets anguish pass.

But Balan rose on hands and knees
And crawled by childlike dim degrees
Up toward his brother, as a breeze
Creeps wingless over sluggard seas
   When all the windâs heart fails it: so
Beneath their motherâs eyes had he,
A babe that laughed with joy to be,
Made toward him standing by her knee
   For loveâs sake long ago.

Then, gathering strength up for a space,
From off his brotherâs dying face
With dying hands that wrought apace
While death and life would grant them grace
   He loosed his helm and knew not him,
So scored with blood it was, and hewn
Athwart with darkening wounds: but soon
Life strove and shuddered through the swoon
   Wherein its light lay dim.

And sorrow set these chained words free:
âO Balan, O my brother! me
Thou hast slain, and I, my brother, thee
And now far hence, on shore and sea,
   Shall all the wide world speak of us.â
âAlas,â said Balan, âthat I might
Not know you, seeing two swords were dight
About you; now the unanswering sight
   Hath here found answer thus.

âBecause you bore another shield
Than yours, that even ere youth could wield
Like arms with manhoodâs tried and steeled
Shone as my star of battle-field,
   I deemed it surely might not be
My brother.â  Then his brother spake
Fiercely: âWould God, for thy sole sake,
I had my life again, to take
   Revenge for only thee!

âFor all this deadly work was wrought
Of one false knightâs false word and thought,
Whose mortal craft and counsel caught
And snared my faith who doubted nought,
   And made me put my shield away.
Ah, might I live, I would destroy
That castle for its customs: joy
There makes of grief a deadly toy,
   And death makes night of day.â

âWell done were that, if aught were done
Well ever here beneath the sun,â
Said Balan: âbetter work were none:
For hither since I came and won
   A woful honour born of death,
When here my hap it was to slay
A knight who kept this island way,
I might not pass by night or day
   Hence, as this token saith.

âNo more shouldst thou, for all the might
Of heart and hand that seals thee knight
Most noble of all that see the light,
Brother, hadst thou but slain in fight
   Me, and arisen unscathed and whole,
As would to God thou hadst risen! though here
Light is as darkness, hope as fear,
And love as hate: and none draws near
   Save toward a mortal goal.â

Then, fair as any poison-flower
Whose blossom blights the withering bower
Whereon its blasting breath has power,
Forth fared the lady of the tower
   With many a lady and many a knight,
And came across the water-way
Even where on deathâs dim border lay
Those brethren sent of her to slay
   And die in kindless fight.

And all those hard light hearts were swayed
With pity passing like a shade
That stays not, and may be not stayed,
To hear the mutual moan they made,
   Each to behold his brother die,
Saying, âBoth we came out of one tomb,
One star-crossed motherâs woful womb,
And so within one grave-pitâs gloom
   Untimely shall we lie.â

And Balan prayed, as God should bless
That lady for her gentleness,
That where the battleâs mortal stress
Had made for them perforce to press
   The bed whence never man may rise
They twain, free now from hopes and fears,
Might sleep; and she, as one that hears,
Bowed her bright head: and very tears
   Fell from her cold fierce eyes.

Then Balen prayed her send a priest
To housel them, that ere they ceased
The hansel of the heavenly feast
That fills with light from the answering east
   The sunset of the life of man
Might bless them, and their lips be kissed
With deathâs requickening eucharist,
And deathâs and lifeâs dim sunlit mist
   Pass as a stream that ran.

And so their dying rites were done:
And Balen, seeing the death-struck sun
Sink, spake as he whose goal is won:
âNow, when our trophied tomb is one,
   And over us our tale is writ,
How two that loved each other, two
Born and begotten brethren, slew
Each other, none that reads anew
   Shall choose but weep for it.

âAnd no good knight and no good man
Whose eye shall ever come to scan
The record of the imperious ban
That made our life so sad a span
   Shall read or hear, who shall not pray
For us for ever.â  Then anon
Died Balan; but the sun was gone,
And deep the stars of midnight shone,
   Ere Balen passed away.

And there low lying, as hour on hour
Fled, all his life in all its flower
Came back as in a sunlit shower
Of dreams, when sweet-souled sleep has power
   On life less sweet and glad to be.
He drank the draught of lifeâs first wine
Again: he saw the moorland shine,
The rioting rapids of the Tyne,
   The woods, the cliffs, the sea.

The joy that lives at heart and home,
The joy to rest, the joy to roam,
The joy of crags and scaurs he clomb,
The rapture of the encountering foam
   Embraced and breasted of the boy,
The first good steed his knees bestrode,
The first wild sound of songs that flowed
Through ears that thrilled and heart that glowed,
   Fulfilled his death with joy.

So, dying not as a coward that dies
And dares not look in deathâs dim eyes
Straight as the stars on seas and skies
Whence moon and sun recoil and rise,
   He looked on life and death, and slept.
And there with morning Merlin came,
And on the tomb that told their fame
He wrote by Balanâs Balenâs name,
   And gazed thereon, and wept.

For all his heart within him yearned
With pity like as fire that burned.
The fate his fateful eye discerned
Far off now dimmed it, ere he turned
   His face toward Camelot, to tell
Arthur of all the storms that woke
Round Balen, and the dolorous stroke,
And how that last blind battle broke
   The consummated spell.

âAlas,â King Arthur said, âthis day
I have heard the worst that woe might say:
For in this world that wanes away
I know not two such knights as they.â
   This is the tale that memory writes
Of men whose names like stars shall stand,
Balen and Balan, sure of hand,
Two brethren of Northumberland,
   In life and death good knights.




***END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE TALE OF BALEN***


******* This file should be named 2136-0.txt or 2136-0.zip *******


This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
http://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/2/1/3/2136



Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://www.gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/pglaf.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://www.gutenberg.org/about/contact

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit:
http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.



﻿The Project Gutenberg EBook of Sonnets, and Sonnets on English Dramatic
Poets (1590-1650), by Algernon Charles Swinburne

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Sonnets, and Sonnets on English Dramatic Poets (1590-1650)
       Taken from The Collected Poetical Works of Algernon Charles
       Swinburne, Vol V.

Author: Algernon Charles Swinburne

Release Date: December 18, 2005 [EBook #17347]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SONNETS ***




Produced by Paul Murray, Annika Feilbach and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net







Sonnets

Sonnets on English Dramatic Poets (1590-1650)


By Algernon Charles Swinburne


Taken from
The Collected Poetical Works of Algernon Charles Swinburne, Vol V.




SWINBURNE'S POETICAL
WORKS


  I. POEMS AND BALLADS (First Series).

 II. SONGS BEFORE SUNRISE, and SONGS OF TWO NATIONS.

III. POEMS AND BALLADS (Second and Third Series), and SONGS OF THE
     SPRINGTIDES.

 IV. TRISTRAM OF LYONESSE, THE TALE OF BALEN, ATALANTA IN CALYDON,
     ERECHTHEUS.

  V. STUDIES IN SONG, A CENTURY OF ROUNDELS, SONNETS ON ENGLISH DRAMATIC
     POETS, THE HEPTALOGIA, ETC.

 VI. A MIDSUMMER HOLIDAY, ASTROPHEL, A CHANNEL PASSAGE AND OTHER POEMS.


_First printed (Chatto), 1904_
_Reprinted 1904, '09, '10, '12_
_(Heinemann), 1917_


_London: William Heinemann, 1917_




SONNETS:


HOPE AND FEAR                                                        227
AFTER SUNSET                                                         228
A STUDY FROM MEMORY                                                  230
TO DR. JOHN BROWN                                                    231
TO WILLIAM BELL SCOTT                                                232
A DEATH ON EASTER DAY                                                233
ON THE DEATHS OF THOMAS CARLYLE AND GEORGE ELIOT                     234
AFTER LOOKING INTO CARLYLE'S REMINISCENCES                           235
A LAST LOOK                                                          237
DICKENS                                                              238
ON LAMB'S SPECIMENS OF DRAMATIC POETS                                239
TO JOHN NICHOL                                                       241
DYSTHANATOS                                                          243
EUONYMOS                                                             244
ON THE RUSSIAN PERSECUTION OF THE JEWS                               245
BISMARCK AT CANOSSA                                                  246
QUIA NOMINOR LEO                                                     247
THE CHANNEL TUNNEL                                                   249
SIR WILLIAM GOMM                                                     250




SONNETS ON ENGLISH DRAMATIC POETS

1590-1650


    I. Christopher Marlowe                                           297
   II. William Shakespeare                                           298
  III. Ben Jonson                                                    299
   IV. Beaumont and Fletcher                                         300
    V. Philip Massinger                                              301
   VI. John Ford                                                     302
  VII. John Webster                                                  303
 VIII. Thomas Decker                                                 304
   IX. Thomas Middleton                                              305
    X. Thomas Heywood                                                306
   XI. George Chapman                                                307
  XII. John Marston                                                  308
 XIII. John Day                                                      309
  XIV. James Shirley                                                 310
   XV. The Tribe of Benjamin                                         311
  XVI. Anonymous Plays: "Arden of Feversham"                         312
 XVII. Anonymous Plays                                               313
XVIII. Anonymous Plays                                               314
  XIX. The Many                                                      315
   XX. The Many                                                      316
  XXI. Epilogue                                                      317





SONNETS




HOPE AND FEAR


Beneath the shadow of dawn's aerial cope,
  With eyes enkindled as the sun's own sphere,
  Hope from the front of youth in godlike cheer
Looks Godward, past the shades where blind men grope
Round the dark door that prayers nor dreams can ope,
  And makes for joy the very darkness dear
  That gives her wide wings play; nor dreams that fear
At noon may rise and pierce the heart of hope.
Then, when the soul leaves off to dream and yearn,
May truth first purge her eyesight to discern
  What once being known leaves time no power to appal;
Till youth at last, ere yet youth be not, learn
  The kind wise word that falls from years that fall--
  "Hope thou not much, and fear thou not at all."




AFTER SUNSET

"Si quis piorum Manibus locus."


I

Straight from the sun's grave in the deep clear west
  A sweet strong wind blows, glad of life: and I,
  Under the soft keen stardawn whence the sky
Takes life renewed, and all night's godlike breast
Palpitates, gradually revealed at rest
  By growth and change of ardours felt on high,
  Make onward, till the last flame fall and die
And all the world by night's broad hand lie blest.
Haply, meseems, as from that edge of death,
Whereon the day lies dark, a brightening breath
  Blows more of benediction than the morn,
So from the graves whereon grief gazing saith
  That half our heart of life there lies forlorn
  May light or breath at least of hope be born.


II

The wind was soft before the sunset fled:
  Now, while the cloud-enshrouded corpse of day
  Is lowered along a red funereal way
Down to the dark that knows not white from red,
A clear sheer breeze against the night makes head,
  Serene, but sure of life as ere a ray
  Springs, or the dusk of dawn knows red from grey,
Being as a soul that knows not quick from dead.
From far beyond the sunset, far above,
  Full toward the starry soundless east it blows
  Bright as a child's breath breathing on a rose,
Smooth to the sense as plume of any dove;
  Till more and more as darkness grows and glows
Silence and night seem likest life and love.


III

If light of life outlive the set of sun
  That men call death and end of all things, then
  How should not that which life held best for men
And proved most precious, though it seem undone
By force of death and woful victory won,
  Be first and surest of revival, when
  Death shall bow down to life arisen again?
So shall the soul seen be the self-same one
That looked and spake with even such lips and eyes
As love shall doubt not then to recognise,
  And all bright thoughts and smiles of all time past
Revive, transfigured, but in spirit and sense
None other than we knew, for evidence
  That love's last mortal word was not his last.




A STUDY FROM MEMORY


If that be yet a living soul which here
  Seemed brighter for the growth of numbered springs
  And clothed by Time and Pain with goodlier things
Each year it saw fulfilled a fresh fleet year,
Death can have changed not aught that made it dear;
  Half humorous goodness, grave-eyed mirth on wings
  Bright-balanced, blither-voiced than quiring strings;
Most radiant patience, crowned with conquering cheer;
A spirit inviolable that smiled and sang
  By might of nature and heroic need
  More sweet and strong than loftiest dream or deed;
A song that shone, a light whence music rang
  High as the sunniest heights of kindliest thought;
  All these must be, or all she was be nought.




TO DR. JOHN BROWN


Beyond the north wind lay the land of old
  Where men dwelt blithe and blameless, clothed and fed
  With joy's bright raiment and with love's sweet bread,
The whitest flock of earth's maternal fold.
None there might wear about his brows enrolled
  A light of lovelier fame than rings your head,
  Whose lovesome love of children and the dead
All men give thanks for: I far off behold
A dear dead hand that links us, and a light
The blithest and benignest of the night,
  The night of death's sweet sleep, wherein may be
A star to show your spirit in present sight
  Some happier island in the Elysian sea
  Where Rab may lick the hand of Marjorie.

_March 1882._




TO WILLIAM BELL SCOTT


The larks are loud above our leagues of whin
  Now the sun's perfume fills their glorious gold
  With odour like the colour: all the wold
Is only light and song and wind wherein
These twain are blent in one with shining din.
  And now your gift, a giver's kingly-souled,
  Dear old fast friend whose honours grow not old,
Bids memory's note as loud and sweet begin.
Though all but we from life be now gone forth
Of that bright household in our joyous north
Where I, scarce clear of boyhood just at end,
  First met your hand; yet under life's clear dome,
Now seventy strenuous years have crowned my friend,
  Shines no less bright his full-sheaved harvest-home.

_April 20, 1882._




A DEATH ON EASTER DAY


The strong spring sun rejoicingly may rise,
  Rise and make revel, as of old men said,
  Like dancing hearts of lovers newly wed:
A light more bright than ever bathed the skies
Departs for all time out of all men's eyes.
  The crowns that girt last night a living head
  Shine only now, though deathless, on the dead:
Art that mocks death, and Song that never dies.
Albeit the bright sweet mothlike wings be furled,
  Hope sees, past all division and defection,
    And higher than swims the mist of human breath,
The soul most radiant once in all the world
  Requickened to regenerate resurrection
    Out of the likeness of the shadow of death.

_April 1882._




ON THE DEATHS OF THOMAS CARLYLE AND GEORGE ELIOT


Two souls diverse out of our human sight
  Pass, followed one with love and each with wonder:
  The stormy sophist with his mouth of thunder,
Clothed with loud words and mantled in the might
Of darkness and magnificence of night;
  And one whose eye could smite the night in sunder,
  Searching if light or no light were thereunder,
And found in love of loving-kindness light.
Duty divine and Thought with eyes of fire
Still following Righteousness with deep desire
  Shone sole and stern before her and above,
Sure stars and sole to steer by; but more sweet
Shone lower the loveliest lamp for earthly feet,
  The light of little children, and their love.




AFTER LOOKING INTO CARLYLE'S REMINISCENCES


I

Three men lived yet when this dead man was young
  Whose names and words endure for ever: one
  Whose eyes grew dim with straining toward the sun,
And his wings weakened, and his angel's tongue
Lost half the sweetest song was ever sung,
  But like the strain half uttered earth hears none,
  Nor shall man hear till all men's songs are done:
One whose clear spirit like an eagle hung
Between the mountains hallowed by his love
And the sky stainless as his soul above:
  And one the sweetest heart that ever spake
The brightest words wherein sweet wisdom smiled.
These deathless names by this dead snake defiled
  Bid memory spit upon him for their sake.


II

Sweet heart, forgive me for thine own sweet sake,
  Whose kind blithe soul such seas of sorrow swam,
  And for my love's sake, powerless as I am
For love to praise thee, or like thee to make
Music of mirth where hearts less pure would break,
  Less pure than thine, our life-unspotted Lamb.
  Things hatefullest thou hadst not heart to damn,
Nor wouldst have set thine heel on this dead snake.
Let worms consume its memory with its tongue,
The fang that stabbed fair Truth, the lip that stung
  Men's memories uncorroded with its breath.
Forgive me, that with bitter words like his
I mix the gentlest English name that is,
  The tenderest held of all that know not death.




A LAST LOOK


Sick of self-love, Malvolio, like an owl
  That hoots the sun rerisen where starlight sank,
  With German garters crossed athwart thy frank
Stout Scottish legs, men watched thee snarl and scowl,
And boys responsive with reverberate howl
  Shrilled, hearing how to thee the springtime stank
  And as thine own soul all the world smelt rank
And as thine own thoughts Liberty seemed foul.
Now, for all ill thoughts nursed and ill words given
Not all condemned, not utterly forgiven,
  Son of the storm and darkness, pass in peace.
Peace upon earth thou knewest not: now, being dead,
Rest, with nor curse nor blessing on thine head,
  Where high-strung hate and strenuous envy cease.




DICKENS


Chief in thy generation born of men
  Whom English praise acclaimed as English-born,
  With eyes that matched the worldwide eyes of morn
For gleam of tears or laughter, tenderest then
When thoughts of children warmed their light, or when
  Reverence of age with love and labour worn,
  Or godlike pity fired with godlike scorn,
Shot through them flame that winged thy swift live pen:
Where stars and suns that we behold not burn,
  Higher even than here, though highest was here thy place,
    Love sees thy spirit laugh and speak and shine
With Shakespeare and the soft bright soul of Sterne
  And Fielding's kindliest might and Goldsmith's grace;
    Scarce one more loved or worthier love than thine.




ON LAMB'S SPECIMENS OF DRAMATIC POETS


I

If all the flowers of all the fields on earth
  By wonder-working summer were made one,
  Its fragrance were not sweeter in the sun,
Its treasure-house of leaves were not more worth
Than those wherefrom thy light of musing mirth
  Shone, till each leaf whereon thy pen would run
  Breathed life, and all its breath was benison.
Beloved beyond all names of English birth,
More dear than mightier memories; gentlest name
That ever clothed itself with flower-sweet fame,
Or linked itself with loftiest names of old
  By right and might of loving; I, that am
Less than the least of those within thy fold,
  Give only thanks for them to thee, Charles Lamb.


II

So many a year had borne its own bright bees
  And slain them since thy honey-bees were hived,
  John Day, in cells of flower-sweet verse contrived
So well with craft of moulding melodies,
Thy soul perchance in amaranth fields at ease
  Thought not to hear the sound on earth revived
  Of summer music from the spring derived
When thy song sucked the flower of flowering trees.
But thine was not the chance of every day:
  Time, after many a darkling hour, grew sunny,
    And light between the clouds ere sunset swam,
Laughing, and kissed their darkness all away,
  When, touched and tasted and approved, thy honey
    Took subtler sweetness from the lips of Lamb.




TO JOHN NICHOL


I

Friend of the dead, and friend of all my days
  Even since they cast off boyhood, I salute
  The song saluting friends whose songs are mute
With full burnt-offerings of clear-spirited praise.
That since our old young years our several ways
  Have led through fields diverse of flower and fruit,
  Yet no cross wind has once relaxed the root
We set long since beneath the sundawn's rays,
The root of trust whence towered the trusty tree,
  Friendship--this only and duly might impel
    My song to salutation of your own;
More even than praise of one unseen of me
  And loved--the starry spirit of Dobell,
    To mine by light and music only known.


II

But more than this what moves me most of all
  To leave not all unworded and unsped
  The whole heart's greeting of my thanks unsaid
Scarce needs this sign, that from my tongue should fall
His name whom sorrow and reverent love recall,
  The sign to friends on earth of that dear head
  Alive, which now long since untimely dead
The wan grey waters covered for a pall.
Their trustless reaches dense with tangling stems
  Took never life more taintless of rebuke,
    More pure and perfect, more serene and kind,
Than when those clear eyes closed beneath the Thames,
  And made the now more hallowed name of Luke
    Memorial to us of morning left behind.

_May 1881._




DYSTHANATOS

_Ad generem Cereris sine cæde et vulnere pauci
Descendunt reges, aut siccâ morte tyranni._


By no dry death another king goes down
  The way of kings. Yet may no free man's voice,
  For stern compassion and deep awe, rejoice
That one sign more is given against the crown,
That one more head those dark red waters drown
  Which rise round thrones whose trembling equipoise
  Is propped on sand and bloodshed and such toys
As human hearts that shrink at human frown.
The name writ red on Polish earth, the star
That was to outshine our England's in the far
  East heaven of empire--where is one that saith
Proud words now, prophesying of this White Czar?
  "In bloodless pangs few kings yield up their breath,
Few tyrants perish by no violent death."

_March 14, 1881._




EUONYMOS

[Greek: eu mên hê timên edidou nikêphoros alkê
ek nikês onom' esche phobou kear aien athiktos.]


A year ago red wrath and keen despair
  Spake, and the sole word from their darkness sent
  Laid low the lord not all omnipotent
Who stood most like a god of all that were
As gods for pride of power, till fire and air
  Made earth of all his godhead. Lightning rent
  The heart of empire's lurid firmament,
And laid the mortal core of manhood bare.
But when the calm crowned head that all revere
For valour higher than that which casts out fear,
  Since fear came near it never, comes near death,
Blind murder cowers before it, knowing that here
  No braver soul drew bright and queenly breath
  Since England wept upon Elizabeth.

_March 8, 1882._




ON THE RUSSIAN PERSECUTION OF
THE JEWS


O son of man, by lying tongues adored,
  By slaughterous hands of slaves with feet red-shod
  In carnage deep as ever Christian trod
Profaned with prayer and sacrifice abhorred
And incense from the trembling tyrant's horde,
  Brute worshippers or wielders of the rod,
  Most murderous even of all that call thee God,
Most treacherous even that ever called thee Lord;
Face loved of little children long ago,
  Head hated of the priests and rulers then,
    If thou see this, or hear these hounds of thine
    Run ravening as the Gadarean swine,
Say, was not this thy Passion, to foreknow
  In death's worst hour the works of Christian men?

_January 23, 1882._




BISMARCK AT CANOSSA


Not all disgraced, in that Italian town,
  The imperial German cowered beneath thine hand,
  Alone indeed imperial Hildebrand,
And felt thy foot and Rome's, and felt her frown
And thine, more strong and sovereign than his crown,
  Though iron forged its blood-encrusted band.
  But now the princely wielder of his land,
For hatred's sake toward freedom, so bows down,
No strength is in the foot to spurn: its tread
Can bruise not now the proud submitted head:
  But how much more abased, much lower brought low,
And more intolerably humiliated,
  The neck submissive of the prosperous foe,
  Than his whom scorn saw shuddering in the snow!

_December 31, 1881._




QUIA NOMINOR LEO


I

What part is left thee, lion? Ravenous beast,
  Which hadst the world for pasture, and for scope
  And compass of thine homicidal hope
The kingdom of the spirit of man, the feast
Of souls subdued from west to sunless east,
  From blackening north to bloodred south aslope,
  All servile; earth for footcloth of the pope,
And heaven for chancel-ceiling of the priest;
Thou that hadst earth by right of rack and rod,
Thou that hadst Rome because thy name was God,
  And by thy creed's gift heaven wherein to dwell;
Heaven laughs with all his light and might above
That earth has cast thee out of faith and love;
  Thy part is but the hollow dream of hell.


II

The light of life has faded from thy cause,
  High priest of heaven and hell and purgatory:
  Thy lips are loud with strains of oldworld story,
But the red prey was rent out of thy paws
Long since: and they that dying brake down thy laws
  Have with the fires of death-enkindled glory
  Put out the flame that faltered on thy hoary
High altars, waning with the world's applause.
This Italy was Dante's: Bruno died
Here: Campanella, too sublime for pride,
  Endured thy God's worst here, and hence went home.
And what art thou, that time's full tide should shrink
For thy sake downward? What art thou, to think
  Thy God shall give thee back for birthright Rome?

_January 1882._




THE CHANNEL TUNNEL


Not for less love, all glorious France, to thee,
  "Sweet enemy" called in days long since at end,
  Now found and hailed of England sweeter friend,
Bright sister of our freedom now, being free;
Not for less love or faith in friendship we
  Whose love burnt ever toward thee reprehend
  The vile vain greed whose pursy dreams portend
Between our shores suppression of the sea.
Not by dull toil of blind mechanic art
Shall these be linked for no man's force to part
  Nor length of years and changes to divide,
But union only of trust and loving heart
  And perfect faith in freedom strong to abide
  And spirit at one with spirit on either side.

_April 3, 1882._




SIR WILLIAM GOMM


I

At threescore years and five aroused anew
  To rule in India, forth a soldier went
  On whose bright-fronted youth fierce war had spent
Its iron stress of storm, till glory grew
Full as the red sun waned on Waterloo.
  Landing, he met the word from England sent
  Which bade him yield up rule: and he, content,
Resigned it, as a mightier warrior's due;
And wrote as one rejoicing to record
That "from the first" his royal heart was lord
  Of its own pride or pain; that thought was none
Therein save this, that in her perilous strait
England, whose womb brings forth her sons so great,
  Should choose to serve her first her mightiest son.


II

Glory beyond all flight of warlike fame
  Go with the warrior's memory who preferred
  To praise of men whereby men's hearts are stirred,
And acclamation of his own proud name
With blare of trumpet-blasts and sound and flame
  Of pageant honour, and the titular word
  That only wins men worship of the herd,
His country's sovereign good; who overcame
Pride, wrath, and hope of all high chance on earth,
For this land's love that gave his great heart birth.
  O nursling of the sea-winds and the sea,
Immortal England, goddess ocean-born,
What shall thy children fear, what strengths not scorn,
  While children of such mould are born to thee?





SONNETS

ON

ENGLISH DRAMATIC POETS

(1590-1650)




I

CHRISTOPHER MARLOWE


Crowned, girdled, garbed and shod with light and fire,
  Son first-born of the morning, sovereign star!
  Soul nearest ours of all, that wert most far,
Most far off in the abysm of time, thy lyre
Hung highest above the dawn-enkindled quire
  Where all ye sang together, all that are,
  And all the starry songs behind thy car
Rang sequence, all our souls acclaim thee sire.

"If all the pens that ever poets held
  Had fed the feeling of their masters' thoughts,"
  And as with rush of hurtling chariots
The flight of all their spirits were impelled
  Toward one great end, thy glory--nay, not then,
  Not yet might'st thou be praised enough of men.




II

WILLIAM SHAKESPEARE


Not if men's tongues and angels' all in one
  Spake, might the word be said that might speak Thee.
  Streams, winds, woods, flowers, fields, mountains, yea, the sea,
What power is in them all to praise the sun?
His praise is this,--he can be praised of none.
  Man, woman, child, praise God for him; but he
  Exults not to be worshipped, but to be.
He is; and, being, beholds his work well done.
All joy, all glory, all sorrow, all strength, all mirth,
Are his: without him, day were night on earth.
  Time knows not his from time's own period.
All lutes, all harps, all viols, all flutes, all lyres,
Fall dumb before him ere one string suspires.
  All stars are angels; but the sun is God.




III

BEN JONSON


Broad-based, broad-fronted, bounteous, multiform,
  With many a valley impleached with ivy and vine,
  Wherein the springs of all the streams run wine,
And many a crag full-faced against the storm,
The mountain where thy Muse's feet made warm
  Those lawns that revelled with her dance divine
  Shines yet with fire as it was wont to shine
From tossing torches round the dance aswarm.

Nor less, high-stationed on the grey grave heights,
High-thoughted seers with heaven's heart-kindling lights
  Hold converse: and the herd of meaner things
Knows or by fiery scourge or fiery shaft
When wrath on thy broad brows has risen, and laughed
  Darkening thy soul with shadow of thunderous wings.




IV

BEAUMONT AND FLETCHER


An hour ere sudden sunset fired the west,
  Arose two stars upon the pale deep east.
  The hall of heaven was clear for night's high feast,
Yet was not yet day's fiery heart at rest.
Love leapt up from his mother's burning breast
  To see those warm twin lights, as day decreased,
  Wax wider, till when all the sun had ceased
As suns they shone from evening's kindled crest.
Across them and between, a quickening fire,
Flamed Venus, laughing with appeased desire.
  Their dawn, scarce lovelier for the gleam of tears,
Filled half the hollow shell 'twixt heaven and earth
With sound like moonlight, mingling moan and mirth,
  Which rings and glitters down the darkling years.




V

PHILIP MASSINGER


Clouds here and there arisen an hour past noon
  Chequered our English heaven with lengthening bars
  And shadow and sound of wheel-winged thunder-cars
Assembling strength to put forth tempest soon,
When the clear still warm concord of thy tune
  Rose under skies unscared by reddening Mars
  Yet, like a sound of silver speech of stars,
With full mild flame as of the mellowing moon.
Grave and great-hearted Massinger, thy face
High melancholy lights with loftier grace
  Than gilds the brows of revel: sad and wise,
The spirit of thought that moved thy deeper song,
Sorrow serene in soft calm scorn of wrong,
  Speaks patience yet from thy majestic eyes.




VI

JOHN FORD


Hew hard the marble from the mountain's heart
  Where hardest night holds fast in iron gloom
  Gems brighter than an April dawn in bloom,
That his Memnonian likeness thence may start
Revealed, whose hand with high funereal art
  Carved night, and chiselled shadow: be the tomb
  That speaks him famous graven with signs of doom
Intrenched inevitably in lines athwart,
As on some thunder-blasted Titan's brow
  His record of rebellion. Not the day
    Shall strike forth music from so stern a chord,
Touching this marble: darkness, none knows how,
  And stars impenetrable of midnight, may.
    So looms the likeness of thy soul, John Ford.




VII

JOHN WEBSTER


Thunder: the flesh quails, and the soul bows down.
  Night: east, west, south, and northward, very night.
  Star upon struggling star strives into sight,
Star after shuddering star the deep storms drown.
The very throne of night, her very crown,
  A man lays hand on, and usurps her right.
  Song from the highest of heaven's imperious height
Shoots, as a fire to smite some towering town.
Rage, anguish, harrowing fear, heart-crazing crime,
Make monstrous all the murderous face of Time
  Shown in the spheral orbit of a glass
Revolving. Earth cries out from all her graves.
Frail, on frail rafts, across wide-wallowing waves,
  Shapes here and there of child and mother pass.




VIII

THOMAS DECKER


Out of the depths of darkling life where sin
  Laughs piteously that sorrow should not know
  Her own ill name, nor woe be counted woe;
Where hate and craft and lust make drearier din
Than sounds through dreams that grief holds revel in;
  What charm of joy-bells ringing, streams that flow,
  Winds that blow healing in each note they blow,
Is this that the outer darkness hears begin?

O sweetest heart of all thy time save one,
Star seen for love's sake nearest to the sun,
  Hung lamplike o'er a dense and doleful city,
Not Shakespeare's very spirit, howe'er more great,
Than thine toward man was more compassionate,
  Nor gave Christ praise from lips more sweet with pity.




IX

THOMAS MIDDLETON


A wild moon riding high from cloud to cloud,
  That sees and sees not, glimmering far beneath,
  Hell's children revel along the shuddering heath
With dirge-like mirth and raiment like a shroud:
A worse fair face than witchcraft's, passion-proud,
  With brows blood-flecked behind their bridal wreath
  And lips that bade the assassin's sword find sheath
Deep in the heart whereto love's heart was vowed:
A game of close contentious crafts and creeds
  Played till white England bring black Spain to shame:
A son's bright sword and brighter soul, whose deeds
  High conscience lights for mother's love and fame:
Pure gipsy flowers, and poisonous courtly weeds:
  Such tokens and such trophies crown thy name.




X

THOMAS HEYWOOD


Tom, if they loved thee best who called thee Tom,
  What else may all men call thee, seeing thus bright
  Even yet the laughing and the weeping light
That still thy kind old eyes are kindled from?
Small care was thine to assail and overcome
  Time and his child Oblivion: yet of right
  Thy name has part with names of lordlier might
For English love and homely sense of home,
Whose fragrance keeps thy small sweet bayleaf young
  And gives it place aloft among thy peers
    Whence many a wreath once higher strong Time has hurled:
And this thy praise is sweet on Shakespeare's tongue--
  "O good old man, how well in thee appears
    The constant service of the antique world!"




XI

GEORGE CHAPMAN


High priest of Homer, not elect in vain,
  Deep trumpets blow before thee, shawms behind
  Mix music with the rolling wheels that wind
Slow through the labouring triumph of thy train:
Fierce history, molten in thy forging brain,
  Takes form and fire and fashion from thy mind,
  Tormented and transmuted out of kind:
But howsoe'er thou shift thy strenuous strain,
Like Tailor[1] smooth, like Fisher[2] swollen, and now
  Grim Yarrington[3] scarce bloodier marked than thou,
  Then bluff as Mayne's[4] or broad-mouthed Barry's[5] glee;
Proud still with hoar predominance of brow
  And beard like foam swept off the broad blown sea,
  Where'er thou go, men's reverence goes with thee.

    [1] Author of _The Hog hath lost his Pearl_.

    [2] Author of _Fuimus Troes, or the True Trojans_.

    [3] Author of _Two Tragedies in One_.

    [4] Author of _The City Match_.

    [5] Author of _Ram-Alley, or Merry Tricks_.




XII

JOHN MARSTON


The bitterness of death and bitterer scorn
  Breathes from the broad-leafed aloe-plant whence thou
  Wast fain to gather for thy bended brow
A chaplet by no gentler forehead worn.
Grief deep as hell, wrath hardly to be borne,
  Ploughed up thy soul till round the furrowing plough
  The strange black soil foamed, as a black beaked prow
Bids night-black waves foam where its track has torn.
Too faint the phrase for thee that only saith
Scorn bitterer than the bitterness of death
  Pervades the sullen splendour of thy soul,
Where hate and pain make war on force and fraud
And all the strengths of tyrants; whence unflawed
  It keeps this noble heart of hatred whole.




XIII

JOHN DAY


Day was a full-blown flower in heaven, alive
  With murmuring joy of bees and birds aswarm,
  When in the skies of song yet flushed and warm
With music where all passion seems to strive
For utterance, all things bright and fierce to drive
  Struggling along the splendour of the storm,
  Day for an hour put off his fiery form,
And golden murmurs from a golden hive
Across the strong bright summer wind were heard,
  And laughter soft as smiles from girls at play
  And loud from lips of boys brow-bound with May
Our mightiest age let fall its gentlest word,
When Song, in semblance of a sweet small bird,
  Lit fluttering on the light swift hand of Day.




XIV

JAMES SHIRLEY


The dusk of day's decline was hard on dark
  When evening trembled round thy glowworm lamp
  That shone across her shades and dewy damp
A small clear beacon whose benignant spark
Was gracious yet for loiterers' eyes to mark,
  Though changed the watchword of our English camp
  Since the outposts rang round Marlowe's lion ramp,
When thy steed's pace went ambling round Hyde Park.

And in the thickening twilight under thee
Walks Davenant, pensive in the paths where he,
The blithest throat that ever carolled love
  In music made of morning's merriest heart,
Glad Suckling, stumbled from his seat above
  And reeled on slippery roads of alien art.




XV

THE TRIBE OF BENJAMIN


Sons born of many a loyal Muse to Ben,
  All true-begotten, warm with wine or ale,
  Bright from the broad light of its presence, hail!
Prince Randolph, nighest his throne of all his men,
Being highest in spirit and heart who hailed him then
  King, nor might other spread so blithe a sail:
  Cartwright, a soul pent in with narrower pale,
Praised of thy sire for manful might of pen:
Marmion, whose verse keeps alway keen and fine
The perfume of their Apollonian wine
  Who shared with that stout sire of all and thee
The exuberant chalice of his echoing shrine:
  Is not your praise writ broad in gold which he
  Inscribed, that all who praise his name should see?




XVI

ANONYMOUS PLAYS:

"ARDEN OF FEVERSHAM"


Mother whose womb brought forth our man of men,
  Mother of Shakespeare, whom all time acclaims
  Queen therefore, sovereign queen of English dames,
Throned higher than sat thy sonless empress then,
Was it thy son's young passion-guided pen
  Which drew, reflected from encircling flames,
  A figure marked by the earlier of thy names
Wife, and from all her wedded kinswomen
Marked by the sign of murderess? Pale and great,
  Great in her grief and sin, but in her death
  And anguish of her penitential breath
Greater than all her sin or sin-born fate,
  She stands, the holocaust of dark desire,
  Clothed round with song for ever as with fire.




XVII

ANONYMOUS PLAYS


Ye too, dim watchfires of some darkling hour,
  Whose fame forlorn time saves not nor proclaims
  For ever, but forgetfulness defames
And darkness and the shadow of death devour,
Lift up ye too your light, put forth your power,
  Let the far twilight feel your soft small flames
  And smile, albeit night name not even their names,
Ghost by ghost passing, flower blown down on flower:
That sweet-tongued shadow, like a star's that passed
Singing, and light was from its darkness cast
  To paint the face of Painting fair with praise:[1]
And that wherein forefigured smiles the pure
Fraternal face of Wordsworth's Elidure
  Between two child-faced masks of merrier days.[2]

    [1] _Doctor Dodypol._

    [2] _Nobody and Somebody._




XVIII

ANONYMOUS PLAYS


More yet and more, and yet we mark not all:
  The Warning fain to bid fair women heed
  Its hard brief note of deadly doom and deed;[1]
The verse that strewed too thick with flowers the hall
Whence Nero watched his fiery festival;[2]
  That iron page wherein men's eyes who read
  See, bruised and marred between two babes that bleed,
A mad red-handed husband's martyr fall;[3]
The scene which crossed and streaked with mirth the strife
Of Henry with his sons and witchlike wife;[4]
And that sweet pageant of the kindly fiend,
  Who, seeing three friends in spirit and heart made one,
Crowned with good hap the true-love wiles he screened
  In the pleached lanes of pleasant Edmonton.[5]

    [1] _A Warning for Fair Women._

    [2] _The Tragedy of Nero._

    [3] _A Yorkshire Tragedy._

    [4] _Look about you._

    [5] _The Merry Devil of Edmonton._




XIX

THE MANY


I

Greene, garlanded with February's few flowers,
  Ere March came in with Marlowe's rapturous rage:
  Peele, from whose hand the sweet white locks of age
Took the mild chaplet woven of honoured hours:
Nash, laughing hard: Lodge, flushed from lyric bowers:
  And Lilly, a goldfinch in a twisted cage
  Fed by some gay great lady's pettish page
Till short sweet songs gush clear like short spring showers:
Kid, whose grim sport still gambolled over graves:
  And Chettle, in whose fresh funereal verse
  Weeps Marian yet on Robin's wildwood hearse:
Cooke, whose light boat of song one soft breath saves,
  Sighed from a maiden's amorous mouth averse:
Live likewise ye: Time takes not you for slaves.




XX

THE MANY


II

Haughton, whose mirth gave woman all her will:
  Field, bright and loud with laughing flower and bird
  And keen alternate notes of laud and gird:
Barnes, darkening once with Borgia's deeds the quill
Which tuned the passion of Parthenophil:
  Blithe burly Porter, broad and bold of word:
  Wilkins, a voice with strenuous pity stirred:
Turk Mason: Brewer, whose tongue drops honey still:
Rough Rowley, handling song with Esau's hand:
  Light Nabbes: lean Sharpham, rank and raw by turns,
  But fragrant with a forethought once of Burns:
Soft Davenport, sad-robed, but blithe and bland:
  Brome, gipsy-led across the woodland ferns:
Praise be with all, and place among our band.




XXI

EPILOGUE


Our mother, which wast twice, as history saith,
  Found first among the nations: once, when she
  Who bore thine ensign saw the God in thee
Smite Spain, and bring forth Shakespeare: once, when death
Shrank, and Rome's bloodhounds cowered, at Milton's breath:
  More than thy place, then first among the free
  More than that sovereign lordship of the sea
Bequeathed to Cromwell from Elizabeth,
More than thy fiery guiding-star, which Drake
Hailed, and the deep saw lit again for Blake,
  More than all deeds wrought of thy strong right hand,
This praise keeps most thy fame's memorial strong
That thou wast head of all these streams of song,
  And time bows down to thee as Shakespeare's land.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Sonnets, and Sonnets on English
Dramatic Poets (1590-1650), by Algernon Charles Swinburne

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SONNETS ***

***** This file should be named 17347-8.txt or 17347-8.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/1/7/3/4/17347/

Produced by Paul Murray, Annika Feilbach and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


﻿The Project Gutenberg EBook of A Dark Month, by Algernon Charles Swinburne

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: A Dark Month
       From Swinburne's Collected Poetical Works Vol. V

Author: Algernon Charles Swinburne

Release Date: June 7, 2006 [EBook #18524]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK A DARK MONTH ***




Produced by Louise Pryor, Paul Murray and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









A Dark Month


By
Algernon Charles Swinburne

Taken from The Collected Poetical Works of
Algernon Charles Swinburne (Vol. V)




THE COLLECTED POETICAL WORKS
OF ALGERNON CHARLES SWINBURNE


VOL. V

STUDIES IN SONG : A CENTURY OF ROUNDELS : SONNETS ON
ENGLISH DRAMATIC POETS : THE HEPTALOGIA : ETC.




SWINBURNE'S POETICAL WORKS


   I. POEMS AND BALLADS (First Series).

  II. SONGS BEFORE SUNRISE, and SONGS OF TWO NATIONS.

 III. POEMS AND BALLADS (Second and Third Series), and
      SONGS OF THE SPRING TIDES.

  IV. TRISTRAM OF LYONESSE, THE TALE OF BALEN,
      ATALANTA IN CALYDON, ERECHTHEUS.

   V. STUDIES IN SONG, A CENTURY OF ROUNDELS, SONNETS ON ENGLISH
      DRAMATIC POETS, THE HEPTALOGIA, ETC.

  VI. A MIDSUMMER HOLIDAY, ASTROPHEL, A CHANNEL PASSAGE AND OTHER
      POEMS.


LONDON: WILLIAM HEINEMANN




STUDIES IN SONG : A CENTURY OF ROUNDELS : SONNETS ON
ENGLISH DRAMATIC POETS : THE HEPTALOGIA : ETC.

By

Algernon Charles Swinburne


1917

LONDON: WILLIAM HEINEMANN




_First printed (Chatto), 1904_
_Reprinted 1904, '09, '10, '12_
_(Heinemann), 1917_


_London: William Heinemann, 1917_




A DARK MONTH

"La maison sans enfants!"--VICTOR HUGO.


    I

    A month without sight of the sun
      Rising or reigning or setting
    Through days without use of the day,
    Who calls it the month of May?
    The sense of the name is undone
      And the sound of it fit for forgetting.

    We shall not feel if the sun rise,
      We shall not care when it sets:
    If a nightingale make night's air
    As noontide, why should we care?
    Till a light of delight that is done rise,
      Extinguishing grey regrets;

    Till a child's face lighten again
      On the twilight of older faces;
    Till a child's voice fall as the dew
    On furrows with heat parched through
    And all but hopeless of grain,
      Refreshing the desolate places--

    Fall clear on the ears of us hearkening
      And hungering for food of the sound
    And thirsting for joy of his voice:
    Till the hearts in us hear and rejoice,
    And the thoughts of them doubting and darkening
      Rejoice with a glad thing found.

    When the heart of our gladness is gone,
      What comfort is left with us after?
    When the light of our eyes is away,
    What glory remains upon May,
    What blessing of song is thereon
      If we drink not the light of his laughter?

    No small sweet face with the daytime
      To welcome, warmer than noon!
    No sweet small voice as a bird's
    To bring us the day's first words!
    Mid May for us here is not Maytime:
      No summer begins with June.

    A whole dead month in the dark,
      A dawn in the mists that o'ercome her
    Stifled and smothered and sad--
    Swift speed to it, barren and bad!
    And return to us, voice of the lark,
      And remain with us, sunlight of summer.


    II

    Alas, what right has the dawn to glimmer,
      What right has the wind to do aught but moan?
    All the day should be dimmer
      Because we are left alone.

    Yestermorn like a sunbeam present
      Hither and thither a light step smiled,
    And made each place for us pleasant
      With the sense or the sight of a child.

    But the leaves persist as before, and after
      Our parting the dull day still bears flowers;
    And songs less bright than his laughter
      Deride us from birds in the bowers.

    Birds, and blossoms, and sunlight only,
      As though such folly sufficed for spring!
    As though the house were not lonely
      For want of the child its king!


    III

    Asleep and afar to-night my darling
      Lies, and heeds not the night,
    If winds be stirring or storms be snarling;
      For his sleep is its own sweet light.

    I sit where he sat beside me quaffing
      The wine of story and song
    Poured forth of immortal cups, and laughing
      When mirth in the draught grew strong.

    I broke the gold of the words, to melt it
      For hands but seven years old,
    And they caught the tale as a bird, and felt it
      More bright than visible gold.

    And he drank down deep, with his eyes broad beaming,
      Here in this room where I am,
    The golden vintage of Shakespeare, gleaming
      In the silver vessels of Lamb.

    Here by my hearth where he was I listen
      For the shade of the sound of a word,
    Athirst for the birdlike eyes to glisten,
      For the tongue to chirp like a bird.

    At the blast of battle, how broad they brightened,
      Like fire in the spheres of stars,
    And clung to the pictured page, and lightened
      As keen as the heart of Mars!

    At the touch of laughter, how swift it twittered
      The shrillest music on earth;
    How the lithe limbs laughed and the whole child glittered
      With radiant riot of mirth!

    Our Shakespeare now, as a man dumb-stricken,
      Stands silent there on the shelf:
    And my thoughts, that had song in the heart of them, sicken,
      And relish not Shakespeare's self.

    And my mood grows moodier than Hamlet's even,
      And man delights not me,
    But only the face that morn and even
      My heart leapt only to see.

    That my heart made merry within me seeing,
      And sang as his laugh kept time:
    But song finds now no pleasure in being,
      And love no reason in rhyme.


    IV

    Mild May-blossom and proud sweet bay-flower,
      What, for shame, would you have with us here?
    It is not the month of the May-flower
      This, but the fall of the year.

    Flowers open only their lips in derision,
      Leaves are as fingers that point in scorn
    The shows we see are a vision;
      Spring is not verily born.

    Yet boughs turn supple and buds grow sappy,
      As though the sun were indeed the sun:
    And all our woods are happy
      With all their birds save one.

    But spring is over, but summer is over,
      But autumn is over, and winter stands
    With his feet sunk deep in the clover
      And cowslips cold in his hands.

    His hoar grim head has a hawthorn bonnet,
      His gnarled gaunt hand has a gay green staff
    With new-blown rose-blossom on it:
      But his laugh is a dead man's laugh.

    The laugh of spring that the heart seeks after,
      The hand that the whole world yearns to kiss,
    It rings not here in his laughter,
      The sign of it is not this.

    There is not strength in it left to splinter
      Tall oaks, nor frost in his breath to sting:
    Yet it is but a breath as of winter,
      And it is not the hand of spring.


    V

    Thirty-one pale maidens, clad
      All in mourning dresses,
    Pass, with lips and eyes more sad
    That it seems they should be glad,
    Heads discrowned of crowns they had,
      Grey for golden tresses.

    Grey their girdles too for green,
      And their veils dishevelled:
    None would say, to see their mien,
    That the least of these had been
    Born no baser than a queen,
      Reared where flower-fays revelled.

    Dreams that strive to seem awake,
      Ghosts that walk by daytime,
    Weary winds the way they take,
    Since, for one child's absent sake,
    May knows well, whate'er things make
      Sport, it is not Maytime.


    VI

    A hand at the door taps light
    As the hand of my heart's delight:
      It is but a full-grown hand,
    Yet the stroke of it seems to start
    Hope like a bird in my heart,
      Too feeble to soar or to stand.

    To start light hope from her cover
    Is to raise but a kite for a plover
      If her wings be not fledged to soar.
    Desire, but in dreams, cannot ope
    The door that was shut upon hope
      When love went out at the door.

    Well were it if vision could keep
    The lids of desire as in sleep
      Fast locked, and over his eyes
    A dream with the dark soft key
    In her hand might hover, and be
      Their keeper till morning rise;

    The morning that brings after many
    Days fled with no light upon any
      The small face back which is gone;
    When the loved little hands once more
    Shall struggle and strain at the door
      They beat their summons upon.


    VII

    If a soul for but seven days were cast out of heaven and its mirth,
    They would seem to her fears like as seventy years upon earth.

    Even and morrow should seem to her sorrow as long
    As the passage of numberless ages in slumberless song.

    Dawn, roused by the lark, would be surely as dark in her sight
    As her measureless measure of shadowless pleasure was bright.

    Noon, gilt but with glory of gold, would be hoary and grey
    In her eyes that had gazed on the depths, unamazed with the day.

    Night hardly would seem to make darker her dream never done,
    When it could but withhold what a man may behold of the sun.

    For dreams would perplex, were the days that should vex her but seven,
    The sight of her vision, made dark with division from heaven.

    Till the light on my lonely way lighten that only now gleams,
    I too am divided from heaven and derided of dreams.


    VIII

    A twilight fire-fly may suggest
      How flames the fire that feeds the sun:
    "A crooked figure may attest
      In little space a million."

    But this faint-figured verse, that dresses
      With flowers the bones of one bare month,
    Of all it would say scarce expresses
      In crooked ways a millionth.

    A fire-fly tenders to the father
      Of fires a tribute something worth:
    My verse, a shard-borne beetle rather,
      Drones over scarce-illumined earth.

    Some inches round me though it brighten
      With light of music-making thought,
    The dark indeed it may not lighten,
      The silence moves not, hearing nought.

    Only my heart is eased with hearing,
      Only mine eyes are soothed with seeing,
    A face brought nigh, a footfall nearing,
      Till hopes take form and dreams have being.


    IX

    As a poor man hungering stands with insatiate eyes and hands
                  Void of bread
    Right in sight of men that feast while his famine with no least
                  Crumb is fed,

    Here across the garden-wall can I hear strange children call,
                  Watch them play,
    From the windowed seat above, whence the goodlier child I love
                  Is away.

    Here the sights we saw together moved his fancy like a feather
                  To and fro,
    Now to wonder, and thereafter to the sunny storm of laughter
                  Loud and low--

    Sights engraven on storied pages where man's tale of seven
        swift ages
                  All was told--
    Seen of eyes yet bright from heaven--for the lips that laughed
        were seven
                  Sweet years old.


    X

    Why should May remember
      March, if March forget
    The days that began with December
      The nights that a frost could fret?

    All their griefs are done with
      Now the bright months bless
    Fit souls to rejoice in the sun with,
      Fit heads for the wind's caress;

    Souls of children quickening
      With the whole world's mirth,
    Heads closelier than field-flowers thickening
      That crowd and illuminate earth,

    Now that May's call musters
      Files of baby bands
    To marshal in joyfuller clusters
      Than the flowers that encumber their hands.

    Yet morose November
      Found them no less gay,
    With nought to forget or remember
      Less bright than a branch of may.

    All the seasons moving
      Move their minds alike
    Applauding, acclaiming, approving
      All hours of the year that strike.

    So my heart may fret not,
      Wondering if my friend
    Remember me not or forget not
      Or ever the month find end.

    Not that love sows lighter
      Seed in children sown,
    But that life being lit in them brighter
      Moves fleeter than even our own.

    May nor yet September
      Binds their hearts, that yet
    Remember, forget, and remember,
      Forget, and recall, and forget.


    XI

    As light on a lake's face moving
      Between a cloud and a cloud
    Till night reclaim it, reproving
      The heart that exults too loud,

    The heart that watching rejoices
      When soft it swims into sight
    Applauded of all the voices
      And stars of the windy night,

    So brief and unsure, but sweeter
      Than ever a moondawn smiled,
    Moves, measured of no tune's metre,
      The song in the soul of a child;

    The song that the sweet soul singing
      Half listens, and hardly hears,
    Though sweeter than joy-bells ringing
      And brighter than joy's own tears;

    The song that remembrance of pleasure
      Begins, and forgetfulness ends
    With a soft swift change in the measure
      That rings in remembrance of friends

    As the moon on the lake's face flashes,
      So haply may gleam at whiles
    A dream through the dear deep lashes
      Whereunder a child's eye smiles,

    And the least of us all that love him
      May take for a moment part
    With angels around and above him,
      And I find place in his heart.


    XII

    Child, were you kinless and lonely--
      Dear, were you kin to me--
    My love were compassionate only
      Or such as it needs would be.

    But eyes of father and mother
      Like sunlight shed on you shine:
    What need you have heed of another
      Such new strange love as is mine?

    It is not meet if unruly
      Hands take of the children's bread
    And cast it to dogs; but truly
      The dogs after all would be fed.

    On crumbs from the children's table
      That crumble, dropped from above,
    My heart feeds, fed with unstable
      Loose waifs of a child's light love.

    Though love in your heart were brittle
      As glass that breaks with a touch,
    You haply would lend him a little
      Who surely would give you much.


    XIII

    Here is a rough
      Rude sketch of my friend,
    Faint-coloured enough
      And unworthily penned.

    Fearlessly fair
      And triumphant he stands,
    And holds unaware
      Friends' hearts in his hands;

    Stalwart and straight
      As an oak that should bring
    Forth gallant and great
      Fresh roses in spring.

    On the paths of his pleasure
      All graces that wait
    What metre shall measure
      What rhyme shall relate

    Each action, each motion,
      Each feature, each limb,
    Demands a devotion
      In honour of him:

    Head that the hand
      Of a god might have blest,
    Laid lustrous and bland
      On the curve of its crest:

    Mouth sweeter than cherries,
      Keen eyes as of Mars,
    Browner than berries
      And brighter than stars.

    Nor colour nor wordy
      Weak song can declare
    The stature how sturdy,
      How stalwart his air.

    As a king in his bright
      Presence-chamber may be,
    So seems he in height--
      Twice higher than your knee.

    As a warrior sedate
      With reserve of his power,
    So seems he in state--
      As tall as a flower:

    As a rose overtowering
      The ranks of the rest
    That beneath it lie cowering,
      Less bright than their best.

    And his hands are as sunny
      As ruddy ripe corn
    Or the browner-hued honey
      From heather-bells borne.

    When summer sits proudest,
      Fulfilled with its mirth,
    And rapture is loudest
      In air and on earth,

    The suns of all hours
      That have ripened the roots
    Bring forth not such flowers
      And beget not such fruits.

    And well though I know it,
      As fain would I write,
    Child, never a poet
      Could praise you aright.

    I bless you? the blessing
      Were less than a jest
    Too poor for expressing;
      I come to be blest,

    With humble and dutiful
      Heart, from above:
    Bless me, O my beautiful
      Innocent love!

    This rhyme in your praise
      With a smile was begun;
    But the goal of his ways
      Is uncovered to none,

    Nor pervious till after
      The limit impend;
    It is not in laughter
      These rhymes of you end.


    XIV

    Spring, and fall, and summer, and winter,
      Which may Earth love least of them all,
    Whose arms embrace as their signs imprint her,
      Summer, or winter, or spring, or fall?

    The clear-eyed spring with the wood-birds mating,
      The rose-red summer with eyes aglow,
    The yellow fall with serene eyes waiting,
      The wild-eyed winter with hair all snow?

    Spring's eyes are soft, but if frosts benumb her
      As winter's own will her shrewd breath sting:
    Storms may rend the raiment of summer,
      And fall grow bitter as harsh-lipped spring.

    One sign for summer and winter guides me,
      One for spring, and the like for fall:
    Whichever from sight of my friend divides me,
      That is the worst ill season of all.


    XV

    Worse than winter is spring
    If I come not to sight of my king:
    But then what a spring will it be
    When my king takes homage of me!

    I send his grace from afar
    Homage, as though to a star;
    As a shepherd whose flock takes flight
    May worship a star by night.

    As a flock that a wolf is upon
    My songs take flight and are gone:
    No heart is in any to sing
    Aught but the praise of my king.

    Fain would I once and again
    Sing deeds and passions of men:
    But ever a child's head gleams
    Between my work and my dreams.

    Between my hand and my eyes
    The lines of a small face rise,
    And the lines I trace and retrace
    Are none but those of the face.


    XVI

    Till the tale of all this flock of days alike
          All be done,
    Weary days of waiting till the month's hand strike
          Thirty-one,
    Till the clock's hand of the month break off, and end
          With the clock,
    Till the last and whitest sheep at last be penned
          Of the flock,
    I their shepherd keep the count of night and day
          With my song,
    Though my song be, like this month which once was May,
          All too long.


    XVII

    The incarnate sun, a tall strong youth,
      On old Greek eyes in sculpture smiled:
    But trulier had it given the truth
      To shape him like a child.

    No face full-grown of all our dearest
      So lightens all our darkness, none
    Most loved of all our hearts hold nearest
      To far outshines the sun,

    As when with sly shy smiles that feign
      Doubt if the hour be clear, the time
    Fit to break off my work again
      Or sport of prose or rhyme,

    My friend peers in on me with merry
      Wise face, and though the sky stay dim
    The very light of day, the very
      Sun's self comes in with him.


    XVIII

    Out of sight,
      Out of mind!
    Could the light
      Prove unkind?

    Can the sun
      Quite forget
    What was done
      Ere he set?

    Does the moon
      When she wanes
    Leave no tune
      That remains

    In the void
      Shell of night
    Overcloyed
      With her light?

    Must the shore
      At low tide
    Feel no more
      Hope or pride,

    No intense
      Joy to be,
    In the sense
      Of the sea--

    In the pulses
      Of her shocks
    It repulses,
      When its rocks

    Thrill and ring
      As with glee?
    Has my king
      Cast off me,

    Whom no bird
      Flying south
    Brings one word
      From his mouth?

    Not the ghost
      Of a word.
    Riding post
      Have I heard,

    Since the day
      When my king
    Took away
      With him spring,

    And the cup
      Of each flower
    Shrivelled up
      That same hour,

    With no light
      Left behind.
    Out of sight,
      Out of mind!


    XIX

    Because I adore you
      And fall
    On the knees of my spirit before you--
      After all,

    You need not insult,
      My king,
    With neglect, though your spirit exult
      In the spring,

    Even me, though not worth,
      God knows,
    One word of you sent me in mirth,
      Or one rose

    Out of all in your garden
      That grow
    Where the frost and the wind never harden
      Flakes of snow,

    Nor ever is rain
      At all,
    But the roses rejoice to remain
      Fair and tall--

    The roses of love,
      More sweet
    Than blossoms that rain from above
      Round our feet,

    When under high bowers
      We pass,
    Where the west wind freckles with flowers
      All the grass.

    But a child's thoughts bear
      More bright
    Sweet visions by day, and more fair
      Dreams by night,

    Than summer's whole treasure
      Can be:
    What am I that his thought should take pleasure,
      Then, in me?

    I am only my love's
      True lover,
    With a nestful of songs, like doves
      Under cover,

    That I bring in my cap
      Fresh caught,
    To be laid on my small king's lap--
      Worth just nought.

    Yet it haply may hap
      That he,
    When the mirth in his veins is as sap
      In a tree,

    Will remember me too
      Some day
    Ere the transit be thoroughly through
      Of this May--

    Or perchance, if such grace
      May be,
    Some night when I dream of his face.
      Dream of me.

    Or if this be too high
      A hope
    For me to prefigure in my
      Horoscope,

    He may dream of the place
      Where we
    Basked once in the light of his face,
      Who now see

    Nought brighter, not one
      Thing bright,
    Than the stars and the moon and the sun,
      Day nor night.


    XX

        Day by darkling day,
        Overpassing, bears away
    Somewhat of the burden of this weary May.

        Night by numbered night,
        Waning, brings more near in sight
    Hope that grows to vision of my heart's delight.

        Nearer seems to burn
        In the dawn's rekindling urn
    Flame of fragrant incense, hailing his return.

        Louder seems each bird
        In the brightening branches heard
    Still to speak some ever more delightful word.

        All the mists that swim
        Round the dawns that grow less dim
    Still wax brighter and more bright with hope of him.

        All the suns that rise
        Bring that day more near our eyes
    When the sight of him shall clear our clouded skies.

        All the winds that roam
        Fruitful fields or fruitless foam
    Blow the bright hour near that brings his bright face home.


    XXI

    I hear of two far hence
      In a garden met,
    And the fragrance blown from thence
      Fades not yet.

    The one is seven years old,
      And my friend is he:
    But the years of the other have told
      Eighty-three.

    To hear these twain converse
      Or to see them greet
    Were sweeter than softest verse
      May be sweet.

    The hoar old gardener there
      With an eye more mild
    Perchance than his mild white hair
      Meets the child.

    I had rather hear the words
      That the twain exchange
    Than the songs of all the birds
      There that range,

    Call, chirp, and twitter there
      Through the garden-beds
    Where the sun alike sees fair
      Those two heads,

    And which may holier be
      Held in heaven of those
    Or more worth heart's thanks to see
      No man knows.


    XXII

    Of such is the kingdom of heaven,
      No glory that ever was shed
    From the crowning star of the seven
      That crown the north world's head,

    No word that ever was spoken
      Of human or godlike tongue,
    Gave ever such godlike token
      Since human harps were strung.

    No sign that ever was given
      To faithful or faithless eyes
    Showed ever beyond clouds riven
      So clear a Paradise.

    Earth's creeds may be seventy times seven
      And blood have defiled each creed:
    If of such be the kingdom of heaven,
      It must be heaven indeed.


    XXIII

    The wind on the downs is bright
      As though from the sea:
    And morning and night
      Take comfort again with me.

    He is nearer to-day,
      Each night to each morning saith,
    Whose return shall revive dead May
      With the balm of his breath.

    The sunset says to the moon,
      He is nearer to-night
    Whose coming in June
      Is looked for more than the light.

    Bird answers to bird,
      Hour passes the sign on to hour,
    And for joy of the bright news heard
      Flower murmurs to flower.

    The ways that were glad of his feet
      In the woods that he knew
    Grow softer to meet
      The sense of his footfall anew.

    He is near now as day,
      Says hope to the new-born light:
    He is near now as June is to May,
      Says love to the night.


    XXIV

    Good things I keep to console me
      For lack of the best of all,
    A child to command and control me,
      Bid come and remain at his call.

    Sun, wind, and woodland and highland,
      Give all that ever they gave:
    But my world is a cultureless island,
      My spirit a masterless slave.

    And friends are about me, and better
      At summons of no man stand:
    But I pine for the touch of a fetter,
      The curb of a strong king's hand.

    Each hour of the day in her season
      Is mine to be served as I will:
    And for no more exquisite reason
      Are all served idly and ill.

    By slavery my sense is corrupted,
      My soul not fit to be free:
    I would fain be controlled, interrupted,
      Compelled as a thrall may be.

    For fault of spur and of bridle
      I tire of my stall to death:
    My sail flaps joyless and idle
      For want of a small child's breath.


    XXV

    Whiter and whiter
      The dark lines grow,
    And broader opens and brighter
      The sense of the text below.

    Nightfall and morrow
      Bring nigher the boy
    Whom wanting we want not sorrow,
      Whom having we want no joy.

    Clearer and clearer
      The sweet sense grows
    Of the word which hath summer for hearer,
      The word on the lips of the rose.

    Duskily dwindles
      Each deathlike day,
    Till June rearising rekindles
      The depth of the darkness of May.


    XXVI

        "In his bright radiance and collateral light
        Must I be comforted, not in his sphere."

    Stars in heaven are many,
      Suns in heaven but one:
    Nor for man may any
      Star supplant the sun.

    Many a child as joyous
      As our far-off king
    Meets as though to annoy us
      In the paths of spring.

    Sure as spring gives warning,
      All things dance in tune:
    Sun on Easter morning,
      Cloud and windy moon,

    Stars between the tossing
      Boughs of tuneful trees,
    Sails of ships recrossing
      Leagues of dancing seas;

    Best, in all this playtime,
      Best of all in tune,
    Girls more glad than Maytime,
      Boys more bright than June;

    Mixed with all those dances,
      Far through field and street
    Sing their silent glances,
      Ring their radiant feet.

    Flowers wherewith May crowned us
      Fall ere June be crowned:
    Children blossom round us
      All the whole year round.

    Is the garland worthless
      For one rose the less,
    And the feast made mirthless?
      Love, at least, says yes.

    Strange it were, with many
      Stars enkindling air,
    Should but one find any
      Welcome: strange it were,

    Had one star alone won
      Praise for light from far:
    Nay, love needs his own one
      Bright particular star.

    Hope and recollection
      Only lead him right
    In its bright reflection
      And collateral light.

    Find as yet we may not
      Comfort in its sphere:
    Yet these days will weigh not
      When it warms us here;

    When full-orbed it rises,
      Now divined afar:
    None in all the skies is
      Half so good a star;

    None that seers importune
      Till a sign be won:
    Star of our good fortune,
      Rise and reign, our sun!


    XXVII

    I pass by the small room now forlorn
      Where once each night as I passed I knew
    A child's bright sleep from even to morn
      Made sweet the whole night through.

    As a soundless shell, as a songless nest,
      Seems now the room that was radiant then
    And fragrant with his happier rest
      Than that of slumbering men.

    The day therein is less than the day,
      The night is indeed night now therein:
    Heavier the dark seems there to weigh,
      And slower the dawns begin.

    As a nest fulfilled with birds, as a shell
      Fulfilled with breath of a god's own hymn,
    Again shall be this bare blank cell,
      Made sweet again with him.


    XXVIII

    Spring darkens before us,
      A flame going down,
    With chant from the chorus
      Of days without crown--
    Cloud, rain, and sonorous
      Soft wind on the down.

    She is wearier not of us
      Than we of the dream
    That spring was to love us
      And joy was to gleam
    Through the shadows above us
      That shift as they stream.

    Half dark and half hoary,
      Float far on the loud
    Mild wind, as a glory
      Half pale and half proud
    From the twilight of story,
      Her tresses of cloud;

    Like phantoms that glimmer
      Of glories of old
    With ever yet dimmer
      Pale circlets of gold
    As darkness grows grimmer
      And memory more cold.

    Like hope growing clearer
      With wane of the moon,
    Shines toward us the nearer
      Gold frontlet of June,
    And a face with it dearer
      Than midsummer noon.


    XXIX

    You send me your love in a letter,
      I send you my love in a song:
    Ah child, your gift is the better,
      Mine does you but wrong.

    No fame, were the best less brittle,
      No praise, were it wide as earth,
    Is worth so much as a little
      Child's love may be worth.

    We see the children above us
      As they might angels above:
    Come back to us, child, if you love us,
      And bring us your love.


    XXX

    No time for books or for letters:
      What time should there be?
    No room for tasks and their fetters:
      Full room to be free.

    The wind and the sun and the Maytime
      Had never a guest
    More worthy the most that his playtime
      Could give of its best.

    If rain should come on, peradventure,
      (But sunshine forbid!)
    Vain hope in us haply might venture
      To dream as it did.

    But never may come, of all comers
      Least welcome, the rain,
    To mix with his servant the summer's
      Rose-garlanded train!

    He would write, but his hours are as busy
      As bees in the sun,
    And the jubilant whirl of their dizzy
      Dance never is done.

    The message is more than a letter,
      Let love understand,
    And the thought of his joys even better
      Than sight of his hand.


    XXXI

          Wind, high-souled, full-hearted
            South-west wind of the spring!
          Ere April and earth had parted,
            Skies, bright with thy forward wing,
    Grew dark in an hour with the shadow behind it, that bade not a
        bird dare sing.

          Wind whose feet are sunny,
            Wind whose wings are cloud,
          With lips more sweet than honey
            Still, speak they low or loud,
    Rejoice now again in the strength of thine heart: let the depth of
        thy soul wax proud.

          We hear thee singing or sighing,
            Just not given to sight,
          All but visibly flying
            Between the clouds and the light,
    And the light in our hearts is enkindled, the shadow therein of the
        clouds put to flight.

          From the gift of thine hands we gather
            The core of the flowers therein,
          Keen glad heart of heather,
            Hot sweet heart of whin,
    Twin breaths in thy godlike breath close blended of wild spring's
        wildest of kin.

          All but visibly beating
            We feel thy wings in the far
          Clear waste, and the plumes of them fleeting,
            Soft as swan's plumes are,
    And strong as a wild swan's pinions, and swift as the flash of the
        flight of a star.

          As the flight of a planet enkindled
            Seems thy far soft flight
          Now May's reign has dwindled
            And the crescent of June takes light
    And the presence of summer is here, and the hope of a welcomer
        presence in sight.

          Wind, sweet-souled, great-hearted
            Southwest wind on the wold!
          From us is a glory departed
            That now shall return as of old,
    Borne back on thy wings as an eagle's expanding, and crowned with
        the sundawn's gold.

          There is not a flower but rejoices,
            There is not a leaf but has heard:
          All the fields find voices,
            All the woods are stirred:
    There is not a nest but is brighter because of the coming of one
        bright bird.

          Out of dawn and morning,
            Noon and afternoon,
          The sun to the world gives warning
            Of news that brightens the moon;
    And the stars all night exult with us, hearing of joy that shall
        come with June.




{Transcriber's note:

    The line in number VII

          To far outshines the sun,

    appears thus in the original. It may be a misprint.}





End of Project Gutenberg's A Dark Month, by Algernon Charles Swinburne

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK A DARK MONTH ***

***** This file should be named 18524.txt or 18524.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/1/8/5/2/18524/

Produced by Louise Pryor, Paul Murray and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


﻿The Project Gutenberg EBook of Poems and Ballads (Third Series), by 
Algernon Charles Swinburne

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Poems and Ballads (Third Series)
       Taken from The Collected Poetical Works of Algernon Charles
       Swinburne--Vol. III

Author: Algernon Charles Swinburne

Release Date: July 1, 2006 [EBook #18726]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK POEMS AND BALLADS (THIRD SERIES) ***




Produced by Paul Murray, Lisa Reigel, and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









Poems and Ballads

Third Series

By

Algernon Charles Swinburne

Taken from The Collected Poetical Works of Algernon Charles
Swinburne--Vol. III




THE COLLECTED POETICAL WORKS OF ALGERNON CHARLES SWINBURNE

VOL. III


POEMS & BALLADS

(SECOND AND THIRD SERIES)

AND

SONGS OF THE SPRINGTIDES




SWINBURNE'S POETICAL WORKS


  I. POEMS AND BALLADS (First Series).

 II. SONGS BEFORE SUNRISE, AND SONGS OF TWO NATIONS.

III. POEMS AND BALLADS (Second and Third Series), and SONGS OF THE
       SPRINGTIDES.

 IV. TRISTRAM OF LYONESSE, THE TALE OF BALEN, ATALANTA IN CALYDON,
       ERECHTHEUS.

  V. STUDIES IN SONG, A CENTURY OF ROUNDELS, SONNETS ON ENGLISH DRAMATIC
       POETS, THE HEPTALOGIA, ETC.

 VI. A MIDSUMMER HOLIDAY, ASTROPHEL, A CHANNEL PASSAGE AND OTHER POEMS.


LONDON: WILLIAM HEINEMANN




POEMS & BALLADS

(SECOND AND THIRD SERIES)

AND

SONGS OF THE SPRINGTIDES


By

Algernon Charles Swinburne


1917

LONDON: WILLIAM HEINEMANN


_First printed (Chatto), 1904_

_Reprinted 1904, '09, '10, '12_

_(Heinemann), 1917_


_London: William Heinemann, 1917_




POEMS AND BALLADS

THIRD SERIES


                                              PAGE
MARCH: AN ODE                                  169

THE COMMONWEAL                                 174

THE ARMADA                                     187

TO A SEAMEW                                    211

PAN AND THALASSIUS                             215

A BALLAD OF BATH                               222

IN A GARDEN                                    224

A RHYME                                        226

BABY-BIRD                                      228

OLIVE                                          230

A WORD WITH THE WIND                           234

NEAP-TIDE                                      238

BY THE WAYSIDE                                 241

NIGHT                                          243

IN TIME OF MOURNING                            244

THE INTERPRETERS                               245

THE RECALL                                     248

BY TWILIGHT                                    249

A BABY'S EPITAPH                               250

ON THE DEATH OF SIR HENRY TAYLOR               251

IN MEMORY OF JOHN WILLIAM INCHBOLD             252

NEW YEAR'S DAY                                 257

TO SIR RICHARD F. BURTON                       258

NELL GWYN                                      259

CALIBAN ON ARIEL                               260

THE WEARY WEDDING                              261

THE WINDS                                      270

A LYKE-WAKE SONG                               271

A REIVER'S NECK-VERSE                          272

THE WITCH-MOTHER                               273

THE BRIDE'S TRAGEDY                            276

A JACOBITE'S FAREWELL                          281

A JACOBITE'S EXILE                             282

THE TYNESIDE WIDOW                             286

DEDICATION                                     289




POEMS AND BALLADS

THIRD SERIES


TO

WILLIAM BELL SCOTT

POET AND PAINTER

I DEDICATE THESE POEMS

IN MEMORY OF MANY YEARS




     MARCH: AN ODE

     1887


     I

     Ere frost-flower and snow-blossom faded and fell, and the splendour
           of winter had passed out of sight,
     The ways of the woodlands were fairer and stranger than dreams that
           fulfil us in sleep with delight;
     The breath of the mouths of the winds had hardened on tree-tops and
           branches that glittered and swayed
     Such wonders and glories of blossomlike snow or of frost that
           outlightens all flowers till it fade
     That the sea was not lovelier than here was the land, nor the night
           than the day, nor the day than the night,
     Nor the winter sublimer with storm than the spring: such mirth had
           the madness and might in thee made,
     March, master of winds, bright minstrel and marshal of storms that
           enkindle the season they smite.


     II

     And now that the rage of thy rapture is satiate with revel and
           ravin and spoil of the snow,
     And the branches it brightened are broken, and shattered the
           tree-tops that only thy wrath could lay low,
     How should not thy lovers rejoice in thee, leader and lord of the
           year that exults to be born
     So strong in thy strength and so glad of thy gladness whose
           laughter puts winter and sorrow to scorn?
     Thou hast shaken the snows from thy wings, and the frost on thy
           forehead is molten: thy lips are aglow
     As a lover's that kindle with kissing, and earth, with her raiment
           and tresses yet wasted and torn,
     Takes breath as she smiles in the grasp of thy passion to feel
           through her spirit the sense of thee flow.


     III

     Fain, fain would we see but again for an hour what the wind and the
           sun have dispelled and consumed,
     Those full deep swan-soft feathers of snow with whose luminous
           burden the branches implumed
     Hung heavily, curved as a half-bent bow, and fledged not as birds
           are, but petalled as flowers,
     Each tree-top and branchlet a pinnacle jewelled and carved, or a
           fountain that shines as it showers,
     But fixed as a fountain is fixed not, and wrought not to last till
           by time or by tempest entombed,
     As a pinnacle carven and gilded of men: for the date of its doom is
           no more than an hour's,
     One hour of the sun's when the warm wind wakes him to wither the
           snow-flowers that froze as they bloomed.


     IV

     As the sunshine quenches the snowshine; as April subdues thee, and
           yields up his kingdom to May;
     So time overcomes the regret that is born of delight as it passes
           in passion away,
     And leaves but a dream for desire to rejoice in or mourn for with
           tears or thanksgivings; but thou,
     Bright god that art gone from us, maddest and gladdest of months,
           to what goal hast thou gone from us now?
     For somewhere surely the storm of thy laughter that lightens, the
           beat of thy wings that play,
     Must flame as a fire through the world, and the heavens that we
           know not rejoice in thee: surely thy brow
     Hath lost not its radiance of empire, thy spirit the joy that
           impelled it on quest as for prey.


     V

     Are thy feet on the ways of the limitless waters, thy wings on the
           winds of the waste north sea?
     Are the fires of the false north dawn over heavens where summer is
           stormful and strong like thee
     Now bright in the sight of thine eyes? are the bastions of icebergs
           assailed by the blast of thy breath?
     Is it March with the wild north world when April is waning? the
           word that the changed year saith,
     Is it echoed to northward with rapture of passion reiterate from
           spirits triumphant as we
     Whose hearts were uplift at the blast of thy clarions as men's
           rearisen from a sleep that was death
     And kindled to life that was one with the world's and with thine?
           hast thou set not the whole world free?


     VI

     For the breath of thy lips is freedom, and freedom's the sense of
           thy spirit, the sound of thy song,
     Glad god of the north-east wind, whose heart is as high as the
           hands of thy kingdom are strong,
     Thy kingdom whose empire is terror and joy, twin-featured and
           fruitful of births divine,
     Days lit with the flame of the lamps of the flowers, and nights
           that are drunken with dew for wine,
     And sleep not for joy of the stars that deepen and quicken, a
           denser and fierier throng,
     And the world that thy breath bade whiten and tremble rejoices at
           heart as they strengthen and shine,
     And earth gives thanks for the glory bequeathed her, and knows of
           thy reign that it wrought not wrong.


     VII

     Thy spirit is quenched not, albeit we behold not thy face in the
           crown of the steep sky's arch,
     And the bold first buds of the whin wax golden, and witness arise
           of the thorn and the larch:
     Wild April, enkindled to laughter and storm by the kiss of the
           wildest of winds that blow,
     Calls loud on his brother for witness; his hands that were laden
           with blossom are sprinkled with snow,
     And his lips breathe winter, and laugh, and relent; and the live
           woods feel not the frost's flame parch;
     For the flame of the spring that consumes not but quickens is felt
           at the heart of the forest aglow,
     And the sparks that enkindled and fed it were strewn from the hands
           of the gods of the winds of March.




     THE COMMONWEAL

     1887


     I

     Eight hundred years and twenty-one
       Have shone and sunken since the land
       Whose name is freedom bore such brand
     As marks a captive, and the sun
       Beheld her fettered hand.


     II

     But ere dark time had shed as rain
       Or sown on sterile earth as seed
       That bears no fruit save tare and weed
     An age and half an age again,
       She rose on Runnymede.


     III

     Out of the shadow, starlike still,
       She rose up radiant in her right,
       And spake, and put to fear and flight
     The lawless rule of awless will
       That pleads no right save might.


     IV

     Nor since hath England ever borne
       The burden laid on subject lands,
       The rule that curbs and binds all hands
     Save one, and marks for servile scorn
       The heads it bows and brands.


     V

     A commonweal arrayed and crowned
       With gold and purple, girt with steel
       At need, that foes must fear or feel,
     We find her, as our fathers found,
       Earth's lordliest commonweal.


     VI

     And now that fifty years are flown
       Since in a maiden's hand the sign
       Of empire that no seas confine
     First as a star to seaward shone,
       We see their record shine.


     VII

     A troubled record, foul and fair,
       A simple record and serene,
       Inscribes for praise a blameless queen,
     For praise and blame an age of care
       And change and ends unseen.


     VIII

     Hope, wide of eye and wild of wing,
       Rose with the sundawn of a reign
       Whose grace should make the rough ways plain,
     And fill the worn old world with spring,
       And heal its heart of pain.


     IX

     Peace was to be on earth; men's hope
       Was holier than their fathers had,
       Their wisdom not more wise than glad:
     They saw the gates of promise ope,
       And heard what love's lips bade.


     X

     Love armed with knowledge, winged and wise,
       Should hush the wind of war, and see,
       They said, the sun of days to be
     Bring round beneath serener skies
       A stormless jubilee.


     XI

     Time, in the darkness unbeholden
       That hides him from the sight of fear
       And lets but dreaming hope draw near,
     Smiled and was sad to hear such golden
       Strains hail the all-golden year.


     XII

     Strange clouds have risen between, and wild
       Red stars of storm that lit the abyss
       Wherein fierce fraud and violence kiss
     And mock such promise as beguiled
       The fiftieth year from this.


     XIII

     War upon war, change after change,
       Hath shaken thrones and towers to dust,
       And hopes austere and faiths august
     Have watched in patience stern and strange
       Men's works unjust and just.


     XIV

     As from some Alpine watch-tower's portal
       Night, living yet, looks forth for dawn,
       So from time's mistier mountain lawn
     The spirit of man, in trust immortal,
       Yearns toward a hope withdrawn.


     XV

     The morning comes not, yet the night
       Wanes, and men's eyes win strength to see
       Where twilight is, where light shall be
     When conquered wrong and conquering right
       Acclaim a world set free.


     XVI

     Calm as our mother-land, the mother
       Of faith and freedom, pure and wise,
       Keeps watch beneath unchangeful skies,
     When hath she watched the woes of other
       Strange lands with alien eyes?


     XVII

     Calm as she stands alone, what nation
       Hath lacked an alms from English hands?
       What exiles from what stricken lands
     Have lacked the shelter of the station
       Where higher than all she stands?


     XVIII

     Though time discrown and change dismantle
       The pride of thrones and towers that frown,
       How should they bring her glories down--
     The sea cast round her like a mantle,
       The sea-cloud like a crown?


     XIX

     The sea, divine as heaven and deathless,
       Is hers, and none but only she
       Hath learnt the sea's word, none but we
     Her children hear in heart the breathless
       Bright watchword of the sea.


     XX

     Heard not of others, or misheard
       Of many a land for many a year,
       The watchword Freedom fails not here
     Of hearts that witness if the word
       Find faith in England's ear.


     XXI

     She, first to love the light, and daughter
       Incarnate of the northern dawn,
       She, round whose feet the wild waves fawn
     When all their wrath of warring water
       Sounds like a babe's breath drawn,


     XXII

     How should not she best know, love best,
       And best of all souls understand
       The very soul of freedom, scanned
     Far off, sought out in darkling quest
       By men at heart unmanned?


     XXIII

     They climb and fall, ensnared, enshrouded,
       By mists of words and toils they set
       To take themselves, till fierce regret
     Grows mad with shame, and all their clouded
       Red skies hang sunless yet.


     XXIV

     But us the sun, not wholly risen
       Nor equal now for all, illumes
       With more of light than cloud that looms;
     Of light that leads forth souls from prison
       And breaks the seals of tombs.


     XXV

     Did not her breasts who reared us rear
       Him who took heaven in hand, and weighed
       Bright world with world in balance laid?
     What Newton's might could make not clear
       Hath Darwin's might not made?


     XXVI

     The forces of the dark dissolve,
       The doorways of the dark are broken:
       The word that casts out night is spoken,
     And whence the springs of things evolve
       Light born of night bears token.


     XXVII

     She, loving light for light's sake only,
       And truth for only truth's, and song
       For song's sake and the sea's, how long
     Hath she not borne the world her lonely
       Witness of right and wrong?


     XXVIII

     From light to light her eyes imperial
       Turn, and require the further light,
       More perfect than the sun's in sight,
     Till star and sun seem all funereal
       Lamps of the vaulted night.


     XXIX

     She gazes till the strenuous soul
       Within the rapture of her eyes
       Creates or bids awake, arise,
     The light she looks for, pure and whole
       And worshipped of the wise.


     XXX

     Such sons are hers, such radiant hands
       Have borne abroad her lamp of old,
       Such mouths of honey-dropping gold
     Have sent across all seas and lands
       Her fame as music rolled.


     XXXI

     As music made of rolling thunder
       That hurls through heaven its heart sublime,
       Its heart of joy, in charging chime,
     So ring the songs that round and under
       Her temple surge and climb.


     XXXII

     A temple not by men's hands builded,
       But moulded of the spirit, and wrought
       Of passion and imperious thought;
     With light beyond all sunlight gilded,
       Whereby the sun seems nought.


     XXXIII

     Thy shrine, our mother, seen for fairer
       Than even thy natural face, made fair
       With kisses of thine April air
     Even now, when spring thy banner-bearer
       Took up thy sign to bear;


     XXXIV

     Thine annual sign from heaven's own arch
       Given of the sun's hand into thine,
       To rear and cheer each wildwood shrine
     But now laid waste by wild-winged March,
       March, mad with wind like wine.


     XXXV

     From all thy brightening downs whereon
       The windy seaward whin-flower shows
       Blossom whose pride strikes pale the rose
     Forth is the golden watchword gone
       Whereat the world's face glows.


     XXXVI

     Thy quickening woods rejoice and ring
       Till earth seems glorious as the sea:
       With yearning love too glad for glee
     The world's heart quivers toward the spring
       As all our hearts toward thee.


     XXXVII

     Thee, mother, thee, our queen, who givest
       Assurance to the heavens most high
       And earth whereon her bondsmen sigh
     That by the sea's grace while thou livest
       Hope shall not wholly die.


     XXXVIII

     That while thy free folk hold the van
       Of all men, and the sea-spray shed
       As dew more heavenly on thy head
     Keeps bright thy face in sight of man,
       Man's pride shall drop not dead.


     XXXIX

     A pride more pure than humblest prayer,
       More wise than wisdom born of doubt,
       Girds for thy sake men's hearts about
     With trust and triumph that despair
       And fear may cast not out.


     XL

     Despair may wring men's hearts, and fear
       Bow down their heads to kiss the dust,
       Where patriot memories rot and rust,
     And change makes faint a nation's cheer,
       And faith yields up her trust.


     XLI

     Not here this year have true men known,
       Not here this year may true men know,
       That brand of shame-compelling woe
     Which bids but brave men shrink or groan
       And lays but honour low.


     XLII

     The strong spring wind blows notes of praise,
       And hallowing pride of heart, and cheer
       Unchanging, toward all true men here
     Who hold the trust of ancient days
       High as of old this year.


     XLIII

     The days that made thee great are dead;
       The days that now must keep thee great
       Lie not in keeping of thy fate;
     In thine they lie, whose heart and head
       Sustain thy charge of state.


     XLIV

     No state so proud, no pride so just,
       The sun, through clouds at sunrise curled
       Or clouds across the sunset whirled,
     Hath sight of, nor has man such trust
       As thine in all the world.


     XLV

     Each hour that sees the sunset's crest
       Make bright thy shores ere day decline
       Sees dawn the sun on shores of thine,
     Sees west as east and east as west
       On thee their sovereign shine.


     XLVI

     The sea's own heart must needs wax proud
       To have borne the world a child like thee.
       What birth of earth might ever be
     Thy sister? Time, a wandering cloud,
       Is sunshine on thy sea.


     XLVII

     Change mars not her; and thee, our mother,
       What change that irks or moves thee mars?
       What shock that shakes? what chance that jars?
     Time gave thee, as he gave none other,
       A station like a star's.


     XLVIII

     The storm that shrieks, the wind that wages
       War with the wings of hopes that climb
       Too high toward heaven in doubt sublime,
     Assail not thee, approved of ages
       The towering crown of time.


     XLIX

     Toward thee this year thy children turning
       With souls uplift of changeless cheer
       Salute with love that casts out fear,
     With hearts for beacons round thee burning,
       The token of this year.


     L

     With just and sacred jubilation
       Let earth sound answer to the sea
       For witness, blown on winds as free,
     How England, how her crowning nation,
       Acclaims this jubilee.




     THE ARMADA

     1588: 1888


     I

     I

     England, mother born of seamen, daughter fostered of the sea,
     Mother more beloved than all who bear not all their children free,
       Reared and nursed and crowned and cherished by the sea-wind and
           the sun,
       Sweetest land and strongest, face most fair and mightiest heart
           in one,
     Stands not higher than when the centuries known of earth were less
           by three,
       When the strength that struck the whole world pale fell back from
           hers undone.

     II

     At her feet were the heads of her foes bowed down, and the
           strengths of the storm of them stayed,
     And the hearts that were touched not with mercy with terror were
           touched and amazed and affrayed:
       Yea, hearts that had never been molten with pity were molten with
           fear as with flame,
     And the priests of the Godhead whose temple is hell, and his heart
           is of iron and fire,
     And the swordsmen that served and the seamen that sped them, whom
           peril could tame not or tire,
       Were as foam on the winds of the waters of England which tempest
           can tire not or tame.

     III

     They were girded about with thunder, and lightning came forth of
           the rage of their strength,
     And the measure that measures the wings of the storm was the
           breadth of their force and the length:
     And the name of their might was Invincible, covered and clothed
           with the terror of God;
     With his wrath were they winged, with his love were they fired,
           with the speed of his winds were they shod;
     With his soul were they filled, in his trust were they comforted:
           grace was upon them as night,
     And faith as the blackness of darkness: the fume of their balefires
           was fair in his sight,
     The reek of them sweet as a savour of myrrh in his nostrils: the
           world that he made,
     Theirs was it by gift of his servants: the wind, if they spake in
           his name, was afraid,
     And the sun was a shadow before it, the stars were astonished with
           fear of it: fire
     Went up to them, fed with men living, and lit of men's hands for a
           shrine or a pyre;
     And the east and the west wind scattered their ashes abroad, that
           his name should be blest
     Of the tribes of the chosen whose blessings are curses from
           uttermost east unto west.


     II

     I

     Hell for Spain, and heaven for England,--God to God, and man to
           man,--
     Met confronted, light with darkness, life with death: since time
           began,
       Never earth nor sea beheld so great a stake before them set,
       Save when Athens hurled back Asia from the lists wherein they
           met;
     Never since the sands of ages through the glass of history ran
       Saw the sun in heaven a lordlier day than this that lights us
           yet.

     II

     For the light that abides upon England, the glory that rests on her
           godlike name,
     The pride that is love and the love that is faith, a perfume
           dissolved in flame,
       Took fire from the dawn of the fierce July when fleets were
           scattered as foam
     And squadrons as flakes of spray; when galleon and galliass that
           shadowed the sea
     Were swept from her waves like shadows that pass with the clouds
           they fell from, and she
       Laughed loud to the wind as it gave to her keeping the glories of
           Spain and Rome.

     III

     Three hundred summers have fallen as leaves by the storms in their
           season thinned,
     Since northward the war-ships of Spain came sheer up the way of the
           south-west wind:
     Where the citadel cliffs of England are flanked with bastions of
           serpentine,
     Far off to the windward loomed their hulls, an hundred and
           twenty-nine,
     All filled full of the war, full-fraught with battle and charged
           with bale;
     Then store-ships weighted with cannon; and all were an hundred and
           fifty sail.
     The measureless menace of darkness anhungered with hope to prevail
           upon light,
     The shadow of death made substance, the present and visible spirit
           of night,
     Came, shaped as a waxing or waning moon that rose with the fall of
           day,
     To the channel where couches the Lion in guard of the gate of the
           lustrous bay.
     Fair England, sweet as the sea that shields her, and pure as the
           sea from stain,
     Smiled, hearing hardly for scorn that stirred her the menace of
           saintly Spain.


     III

     I

     "They that ride over ocean wide with hempen bridle and horse of
           tree,"
     How shall they in the darkening day of wrath and anguish and fear
           go free?
     How shall these that have curbed the seas not feel his bridle who
           made the sea?

     God shall bow them and break them now: for what is man in the Lord
           God's sight?
     Fear shall shake them, and shame shall break, and all the noon of
           their pride be night:
     These that sinned shall the ravening wind of doom bring under, and
           judgment smite.

     England broke from her neck the yoke, and rent the fetter, and
           mocked the rod:
     Shrines of old that she decked with gold she turned to dust, to the
           dust she trod:
     What is she, that the wind and sea should fight beside her, and war
           with God?

     Lo, the cloud of his ships that crowd her channel's inlet with
           storm sublime,
     Darker far than the tempests are that sweep the skies of her
           northmost clime;
     Huge and dense as the walls that fence the secret darkness of
           unknown time.

     Mast on mast as a tower goes past, and sail by sail as a cloud's
           wing spread;
     Fleet by fleet, as the throngs whose feet keep time with death in
           his dance of dread;
     Galleons dark as the helmsman's bark of old that ferried to hell
           the dead.

     Squadrons proud as their lords, and loud with tramp of soldiers
           and chant of priests;
     Slaves there told by the thousandfold, made fast in bondage as
           herded beasts;
     Lords and slaves that the sweet free waves shall feed on, satiate
           with funeral feasts.

     Nay, not so shall it be, they know; their priests have said it; can
           priesthood lie?
     God shall keep them, their God shall sleep not: peril and evil
           shall pass them by:
     Nay, for these are his children; seas and winds shall bid not his
           children die.

     II

     So they boast them, the monstrous host whose menace mocks at the
           dawn: and here
     They that wait at the wild sea's gate, and watch the darkness of
           doom draw near,
     How shall they in their evil day sustain the strength of their
           hearts for fear?

     Full July in the fervent sky sets forth her twentieth of changing
           morns:
     Winds fall mild that of late waxed wild: no presage whispers or
           wails or warns:
     Far to west on the bland sea's breast a sailing crescent uprears
           her horns.

     Seven wide miles the serene sea smiles between them stretching from
           rim to rim:
     Soft they shine, but a darker sign should bid not hope or belief
           wax dim:
     God's are these men, and not the sea's: their trust is set not on
           her but him.

     God's? but who is the God whereto the prayers and incense of these
           men rise?
     What is he, that the wind and sea should fear him, quelled by his
           sunbright eyes?
     What, that men should return again, and hail him Lord of the
           servile skies?

     Hell's own flame at his heavenly name leaps higher and laughs, and
           its gulfs rejoice:
     Plague and death from his baneful breath take life and lighten, and
           praise his choice:
     Chosen are they to devour for prey the tribes that hear not and
           fear his voice.

     Ay, but we that the wind and sea gird round with shelter of storms
           and waves
     Know not him that ye worship, grim as dreams that quicken from dead
           men's graves:
     God is one with the sea, the sun, the land that nursed us, the love
           that saves.

     Love whose heart is in ours, and part of all things noble and all
           things fair;
     Sweet and free as the circling sea, sublime and kind as the
           fostering air;
     Pure of shame as is England's name, whose crowns to come are as
           crowns that were.


     IV

     I

     But the Lord of darkness, the God whose love is a flaming fire,
     The master whose mercy fulfils wide hell till its torturers tire,
     He shall surely have heed of his servants who serve him for love,
           not hire.

     They shall fetter the wing of the wind whose pinions are plumed
           with foam:
     For now shall thy horn be exalted, and now shall thy bolt strike
           home;
     Yea, now shall thy kingdom come, Lord God of the priests of Rome.

     They shall cast thy curb on the waters, and bridle the waves of the
           sea:
     They shall say to her, Peace, be still: and stillness and peace
           shall be:
     And the winds and the storms shall hear them, and tremble, and
           worship thee.

     Thy breath shall darken the morning, and wither the mounting sun;
     And the daysprings, frozen and fettered, shall know thee, and cease
           to run;
     The heart of the world shall feel thee, and die, and thy will be
           done.

     The spirit of man that would sound thee, and search out causes of
           things,
     Shall shrink and subside and praise thee: and wisdom, with
           plume-plucked wings,
     Shall cower at thy feet and confess thee, that none may fathom thy
           springs.

     The fountains of song that await but the wind of an April to be
     To burst the bonds of the winter, and speak with the sound of a
           sea,
     The blast of thy mouth shall quench them: and song shall be only of
           thee.

     The days that are dead shall quicken, the seasons that were shall
           return;
     And the streets and the pastures of England, the woods that burgeon
           and yearn,
     Shall be whitened with ashes of women and children and men that
           burn.

     For the mother shall burn with the babe sprung forth of her womb in
           fire,
     And bride with bridegroom, and brother with sister, and son with
           sire;
     And the noise of the flames shall be sweet in thine ears as the
           sound of a lyre.

     Yea, so shall thy kingdom be stablished, and so shall the signs of
           it be:
     And the world shall know, and the wind shall speak, and the sun
           shall see,
     That these are the works of thy servants, whose works bear witness
           to thee.

     II

     But the dusk of the day falls fruitless, whose light should have
           lit them on:
     Sails flash through the gloom to shoreward, eclipsed as the sun
           that shone:
     And the west wind wakes with dawn, and the hope that was here is
           gone.

     Around they wheel and around, two knots to the Spaniard's one,
     The wind-swift warriors of England, who shoot as with shafts of the
           sun,
     With fourfold shots for the Spaniard's, that spare not till day be
           done.

     And the wind with the sundown sharpens, and hurtles the ships to
           the lee,
     And Spaniard on Spaniard smites, and shatters, and yields; and we,
     Ere battle begin, stand lords of the battle, acclaimed of the sea.

     And the day sweeps round to the nightward; and heavy and hard the
           waves
     Roll in on the herd of the hurtling galleons; and masters and
           slaves
     Reel blind in the grasp of the dark strong wind that shall dig
           their graves.

     For the sepulchres hollowed and shaped of the wind in the swerve of
           the seas,
     The graves that gape for their pasture, and laugh, thrilled through
           by the breeze,
     The sweet soft merciless waters, await and are fain of these.

     As the hiss of a Python heaving in menace of doom to be
     They hear through the clear night round them, whose hours are as
           clouds that flee,
     The whisper of tempest sleeping, the heave and the hiss of the sea.

     But faith is theirs, and with faith are they girded and helmed and
           shod:
     Invincible are they, almighty, elect for a sword and a rod;
     Invincible even as their God is omnipotent, infinite, God.

     In him is their strength, who have sworn that his glory shall wax
           not dim:
     In his name are their war-ships hallowed as mightiest of all that
           swim:
     The men that shall cope with these, and conquer, shall cast out
           him.

     In him is the trust of their hearts; the desire of their eyes is
           he;
     The light of their ways, made lightning for men that would fain be
           free:
     Earth's hosts are with them, and with them is heaven: but with us
           is the sea.


     V

     I

         And a day and a night pass over;
           And the heart of their chief swells high;
         For England, the warrior, the rover,
           Whose banners on all winds fly,
     Soul-stricken, he saith, by the shadow of death, holds off him, and
           draws not nigh.

         And the wind and the dawn together
           Make in from the gleaming east:
         And fain of the wild glad weather
           As famine is fain of feast,
     And fain of the fight, forth sweeps in its might the host of the
           Lord's high priest.

         And lightly before the breeze
           The ships of his foes take wing:
         Are they scattered, the lords of the seas?
           Are they broken, the foes of the king?
     And ever now higher as a mounting fire the hopes of the Spaniard
           spring.

         And a windless night comes down:
           And a breezeless morning, bright
         With promise of praise to crown
           The close of the crowning fight,
     Leaps up as the foe's heart leaps, and glows with lustrous rapture
           of light.

         And stinted of gear for battle
           The ships of the sea's folk lie,
         Unwarlike, herded as cattle,
           Six miles from the foeman's eye
     That fastens as flame on the sight of them tame and offenceless,
           and ranged as to die.

         Surely the souls in them quail,
           They are stricken and withered at heart,
         When in on them, sail by sail,
           Fierce marvels of monstrous art,
     Tower darkening on tower till the sea-winds cower crowds down as to
           hurl them apart.

         And the windless weather is kindly,
           And comforts the host in these;
         And their hearts are uplift in them blindly,
           And blindly they boast at ease
     That the next day's fight shall exalt them, and smite with
           destruction the lords of the seas.

     II

         And lightly the proud hearts prattle,
           And lightly the dawn draws nigh,
         The dawn of the doom of the battle
           When these shall falter and fly;
     No day more great in the roll of fate filled ever with fire the
           sky.

         To fightward they go as to feastward,
           And the tempest of ships that drive
         Sets eastward ever and eastward,
           Till closer they strain and strive;
     And the shots that rain on the hulls of Spain are as thunders afire
           and alive.

         And about them the blithe sea smiles
           And flashes to windward and lee
         Round capes and headlands and isles
           That heed not if war there be;
     Round Sark, round Wight, green jewels of light in the ring of the
           golden sea.

         But the men that within them abide
           Are stout of spirit and stark
         As rocks that repel the tide,
           As day that repels the dark;
     And the light bequeathed from their swords unsheathed shines lineal
           on Wight and on Sark.

         And eastward the storm sets ever,
           The storm of the sails that strain
         And follow and close and sever
           And lose and return and gain;
     And English thunder divides in sunder the holds of the ships of
           Spain.

         Southward to Calais, appalled
           And astonished, the vast fleet veers;
         And the skies are shrouded and palled,
           But the moonless midnight hears
     And sees how swift on them drive and drift strange flames that the
           darkness fears.

         They fly through the night from shoreward,
           Heart-stricken till morning break,
         And ever to scourge them forward
           Drives down on them England's Drake,
     And hurls them in as they hurtle and spin and stagger, with storm
           to wake.


     VI

     I

         And now is their time come on them. For eastward they drift and
           reel,
         With the shallows of Flanders ahead, with destruction and havoc
           at heel,
         With God for their comfort only, the God whom they serve; and
           here
         Their Lord, of his great loving-kindness, may revel and make
           good cheer;
       Though ever his lips wax thirstier with drinking, and hotter the
           lusts in him swell;
     For he feeds the thirst that consumes him with blood, and his
           winepress fumes with the reek of hell.

     II

         Fierce noon beats hard on the battle; the galleons that loom to
           the lee
         Bow down, heel over, uplifting their shelterless hulls from the
           sea:
         From scuppers aspirt with blood, from guns dismounted and dumb,
         The signs of the doom they looked for, the loud mute witnesses
           come.
       They press with sunset to seaward for comfort: and shall not they
           find it there?
     O servants of God most high, shall his winds not pass you by, and
           his waves not spare?

     III

     The wings of the south-west wind are widened; the breath of his
           fervent lips,
     More keen than a sword's edge, fiercer than fire, falls full on the
           plunging ships.
     The pilot is he of their northward flight, their stay and their
           steersman he;
     A helmsman clothed with the tempest, and girdled with strength to
           constrain the sea.
     And the host of them trembles and quails, caught fast in his hand
           as a bird in the toils;
     For the wrath and the joy that fulfil him are mightier than man's,
           whom he slays and spoils.
     And vainly, with heart divided in sunder, and labour of wavering
           will,
     The lord of their host takes counsel with hope if haply their star
           shine still,
     If haply some light be left them of chance to renew and redeem the
           fray;
     But the will of the black south-wester is lord of the councils of
           war to-day.
     One only spirit it quells not, a splendour undarkened of chance or
           time;
     Be the praise of his foes with Oquendo for ever, a name as a star
           sublime.
     But here what aid in a hero's heart, what help in his hand may be?
     For ever the dark wind whitens and blackens the hollows and heights
           of the sea,
     And galley by galley, divided and desolate, founders; and none
           takes heed,
     Nor foe nor friend, if they perish; forlorn, cast off in their
           uttermost need,
     They sink in the whelm of the waters, as pebbles by children from
           shoreward hurled,
     In the North Sea's waters that end not, nor know they a bourn but
           the bourn of the world.
     Past many a secure unavailable harbour, and many a loud stream's
           mouth,
     Past Humber and Tees and Tyne and Tweed, they fly, scourged on from
           the south,
     And torn by the scourge of the storm-wind that smites as a harper
           smites on a lyre,
     And consumed of the storm as the sacrifice loved of their God is
           consumed with fire,
     And devoured of the darkness as men that are slain in the fires of
           his love are devoured,
     And deflowered of their lives by the storms, as by priests is the
           spirit of life deflowered.
     For the wind, of its godlike mercy, relents not, and hounds them
           ahead to the north,
     With English hunters at heel, till now is the herd of them past the
           Forth,
     All huddled and hurtled seaward; and now need none wage war upon
           these,
     Nor huntsmen follow the quarry whose fall is the pastime sought of
           the seas.
     Day upon day upon day confounds them, with measureless mists that
           swell,
     With drift of rains everlasting and dense as the fumes of ascending
           hell.
     The visions of priest and of prophet beholding his enemies bruised
           of his rod
     Beheld but the likeness of this that is fallen on the faithful, the
           friends of God.
     Northward, and northward, and northward they stagger and shudder
           and swerve and flit,
     Dismantled of masts and of yards, with sails by the fangs of the
           storm-wind split.
     But north of the headland whose name is Wrath, by the wrath or the
           ruth of the sea,
     They are swept or sustained to the westward, and drive through the
           rollers aloof to the lee.
     Some strive yet northward for Iceland, and perish: but some through
           the storm-hewn straits
     That sunder the Shetlands and Orkneys are borne of the breath which
           is God's or fate's:
     And some, by the dawn of September, at last give thanks as for
           stars that smile,
     For the winds have swept them to shelter and sight of the cliffs of
           a Catholic isle.
     Though many the fierce rocks feed on, and many the merciless
           heretic slays,
     Yet some that have laboured to land with their treasure are
           trustful, and give God praise.
     And the kernes of murderous Ireland, athirst with a greed
           everlasting of blood,
     Unslakable ever with slaughter and spoil, rage down as a ravening
           flood,
     To slay and to flay of their shining apparel their brethren whom
           shipwreck spares;
     Such faith and such mercy, such love and such manhood, such hands
           and such hearts are theirs.
     Short shrift to her foes gives England, but shorter doth Ireland to
           friends; and worse
     Fare they that came with a blessing on treason than they that come
           with a curse.
     Hacked, harried, and mangled of axes and skenes, three thousand
           naked and dead
     Bear witness of Catholic Ireland, what sons of what sires at her
           breasts are bred.
     Winds are pitiful, waves are merciful, tempest and storm are kind:
     The waters that smite may spare, and the thunder is deaf, and the
           lightning is blind:
     Of these perchance at his need may a man, though they know it not,
           yet find grace;
     But grace, if another be hardened against him, he gets not at this
           man's face.
     For his ear that hears and his eye that sees the wreck and the wail
           of men,
     And his heart that relents not within him, but hungers, are like as
           the wolf's in his den.
     Worthy are these to worship their master, the murderous Lord of
           lies,
     Who hath given to the pontiff his servant the keys of the pit and
           the keys of the skies.
     Wild famine and red-shod rapine are cruel, and bitter with blood
           are their feasts;
     But fiercer than famine and redder than rapine the hands and the
           hearts of priests.
     God, God bade these to the battle; and here, on a land by his
           servants trod,
     They perish, a lordly blood-offering, subdued by the hands of the
           servants of God.
     These also were fed of his priests with faith, with the milk of his
           word and the wine;
     These too are fulfilled with the spirit of darkness that guided
           their quest divine.
     And here, cast up from the ravening sea on the mild land's merciful
           breast,
     This comfort they find of their fellows in worship; this guerdon is
           theirs of their quest.
     Death was captain, and doom was pilot, and darkness the chart of
           their way;
     Night and hell had in charge and in keeping the host of the foes of
           day.
     Invincible, vanquished, impregnable, shattered, a sign to her foes
           of fear,
     A sign to the world and the stars of laughter, the fleet of the
           Lord lies here.
     Nay, for none may declare the place of the ruin wherein she lies;
     Nay, for none hath beholden the grave whence never a ghost shall
           rise.
     The fleet of the foemen of England hath found not one but a
           thousand graves;
     And he that shall number and name them shall number by name and by
           tale the waves.


     VII

     I

     Sixtus, Pope of the Church whose hope takes flight for heaven to
           dethrone the sun,
     Philip, king that wouldst turn our spring to winter, blasted,
           appalled, undone,
     Prince and priest, let a mourner's feast give thanks to God for
           your conquest won.

     England's heel is upon you: kneel, O priest, O prince, in the dust,
           and cry,
     "Lord, why thus? art thou wroth with us whose faith was great in
           thee, God most high?
     Whence is this, that the serpent's hiss derides us? Lord, can thy
           pledged word lie?

     "God of hell, are its flames that swell quenched now for ever,
           extinct and dead?
     Who shall fear thee? or who shall hear the word thy servants who
           feared thee said?
     Lord, art thou as the dead gods now, whose arm is shortened, whose
           rede is read?

     "Yet we thought it was not for nought thy word was given us, to
           guard and guide:
     Yet we deemed that they had not dreamed who put their trust in
           thee. Hast thou lied?
     God our Lord, was the sacred sword we drew not drawn on thy
           Church's side?

     "England hates thee as hell's own gates; and England triumphs, and
           Rome bows down:
     England mocks at thee; England's rocks cast off thy servants to
           drive and drown:
     England loathes thee; and fame betroths and plights with England
           her faith for crown.

     "Spain clings fast to thee; Spain, aghast with anguish, cries to
           thee; where art thou?
     Spain puts trust in thee; lo, the dust that soils and darkens her
           prostrate brow!
     Spain is true to thy service; who shall raise up Spain for thy
           service now?

     "Who shall praise thee, if none may raise thy servants up, nor
           affright thy foes?
     Winter wanes, and the woods and plains forget the likeness of
           storms and snows:
     So shall fear of thee fade even here: and what shall follow thee no
           man knows."

     Lords of night, who would breathe your blight on April's morning
           and August's noon,
     God your Lord, the condemned, the abhorred, sinks hellward, smitten
           with deathlike swoon:
     Death's own dart in his hateful heart now thrills, and night shall
           receive him soon.

     God the Devil, thy reign of revel is here for ever eclipsed and
           fled:
     God the Liar, everlasting fire lays hold at last on thee, hand and
           head:
     God the Accurst, the consuming thirst that burns thee never shall
           here be fed.

     II

     England, queen of the waves whose green inviolate girdle enrings
           thee round,
     Mother fair as the morning, where is now the place of thy foemen
           found?
     Still the sea that salutes us free proclaims them stricken,
           acclaims thee crowned.

     Times may change, and the skies grow strange with signs of treason
           and fraud and fear:
     Foes in union of strange communion may rise against thee from far
           and near:
     Sloth and greed on thy strength may feed as cankers waxing from
           year to year.

     Yet, though treason and fierce unreason should league and lie and
           defame and smite,
     We that know thee, how far below thee the hatred burns of the sons
           of night,
     We that love thee, behold above thee the witness written of life in
           light.

     Life that shines from thee shows forth signs that none may read not
           but eyeless foes:
     Hate, born blind, in his abject mind grows hopeful now but as
           madness grows:
     Love, born wise, with exultant eyes adores thy glory, beholds and
           glows.

     Truth is in thee, and none may win thee to lie, forsaking the face
           of truth:
     Freedom lives by the grace she gives thee, born again from thy
           deathless youth:
     Faith should fail, and the world turn pale, wert thou the prey of
           the serpent's tooth.

     Greed and fraud, unabashed, unawed, may strive to sting thee at
           heel in vain:
     Craft and fear and mistrust may leer and mourn and murmur and plead
           and plain:
     Thou art thou: and thy sunbright brow is hers that blasted the
           strength of Spain.

     Mother, mother beloved, none other could claim in place of thee
           England's place:
     Earth bears none that beholds the sun so pure of record, so clothed
           with grace:
     Dear our mother, nor son nor brother is thine, as strong or as fair
           of face.

     How shalt thou be abased? or how shall fear take hold of thy heart?
           of thine,
     England, maiden immortal, laden with charge of life and with hopes
           divine?
     Earth shall wither, when eyes turned hither behold not light in her
           darkness shine.

     England, none that is born thy son, and lives, by grace of thy
           glory, free,
     Lives and yearns not at heart and burns with hope to serve as he
           worships thee;
     None may sing thee: the sea-wind's wing beats down our songs as it
           hails the sea.




     TO A SEAMEW


     When I had wings, my brother,
       Such wings were mine as thine:
     Such life my heart remembers
     In all as wild Septembers
     As this when life seems other,
       Though sweet, than once was mine;
     When I had wings, my brother,
       Such wings were mine as thine.

     Such life as thrills and quickens
       The silence of thy flight,
     Or fills thy note's elation
     With lordlier exultation
     Than man's, whose faint heart sickens
       With hopes and fears that blight
     Such life as thrills and quickens
       The silence of thy flight.

     Thy cry from windward clanging
       Makes all the cliffs rejoice;
     Though storm clothe seas with sorrow,
     Thy call salutes the morrow;
     While shades of pain seem hanging
       Round earth's most rapturous voice,
     Thy cry from windward clanging
       Makes all the cliffs rejoice.

     We, sons and sires of seamen,
       Whose home is all the sea,
     What place man may, we claim it;
     But thine--whose thought may name it?
     Free birds live higher than freemen,
       And gladlier ye than we--
     We, sons and sires of seamen,
       Whose home is all the sea.

     For you the storm sounds only
       More notes of more delight
     Than earth's in sunniest weather:
     When heaven and sea together
     Join strengths against the lonely
       Lost bark borne down by night,
     For you the storm sounds only
       More notes of more delight.

     With wider wing, and louder
       Long clarion-call of joy,
     Thy tribe salutes the terror
     Of darkness, wild as error,
     But sure as truth, and prouder
       Than waves with man for toy;
     With wider wing, and louder
       Long clarion-call of joy.

     The wave's wing spreads and flutters,
       The wave's heart swells and breaks;
     One moment's passion thrills it,
     One pulse of power fulfils it
     And ends the pride it utters
       When, loud with life that quakes,
     The wave's wing spreads and flutters,
       The wave's heart swells and breaks.

     But thine and thou, my brother,
       Keep heart and wing more high
     Than aught may scare or sunder;
     The waves whose throats are thunder
     Fall hurtling each on other,
       And triumph as they die;
     But thine and thou, my brother,
       Keep heart and wing more high.

     More high than wrath or anguish,
       More strong than pride or fear,
     The sense or soul half hidden
     In thee, for us forbidden,
     Bids thee nor change nor languish,
       But live thy life as here,
     More high than wrath or anguish,
       More strong than pride or fear.

     We are fallen, even we, whose passion
       On earth is nearest thine;
     Who sing, and cease from flying;
     Who live, and dream of dying:
     Grey time, in time's grey fashion,
       Bids wingless creatures pine:
     We are fallen, even we, whose passion
       On earth is nearest thine.

     The lark knows no such rapture,
       Such joy no nightingale,
     As sways the songless measure
     Wherein thy wings take pleasure:
     Thy love may no man capture,
       Thy pride may no man quail;
     The lark knows no such rapture,
       Such joy no nightingale.

     And we, whom dreams embolden,
       We can but creep and sing
     And watch through heaven's waste hollow
     The flight no sight may follow
     To the utter bourne beholden
       Of none that lack thy wing:
     And we, whom dreams embolden,
       We can but creep and sing.

     Our dreams have wings that falter,
       Our hearts bear hopes that die;
     For thee no dream could better
     A life no fears may fetter,
     A pride no care can alter,
       That wots not whence or why
     Our dreams have wings that falter,
       Our hearts bear hopes that die.

     With joy more fierce and sweeter
       Than joys we deem divine
     Their lives, by time untarnished,
     Are girt about and garnished,
     Who match the wave's full metre
       And drink the wind's wild wine
     With joy more fierce and sweeter
       Than joys we deem divine.

     Ah, well were I for ever,
       Wouldst thou change lives with me,
     And take my song's wild honey,
     And give me back thy sunny
     Wide eyes that weary never,
       And wings that search the sea;
     Ah, well were I for ever,
       Wouldst thou change lives with me.

     _Beachy Head: September 1886._




     PAN AND THALASSIUS

     A LYRICAL IDYL


     THALASSIUS

     Pan!


     PAN

     O sea-stray, seed of Apollo,
       What word wouldst thou have with me?
     My ways thou wast fain to follow
       Or ever the years hailed thee
               Man.

               Now
     If August brood on the valleys,
       If satyrs laugh on the lawns,
     What part in the wildwood alleys
       Hast thou with the fleet-foot fauns--
               Thou?

               See!
     Thy feet are a man's--not cloven
       Like these, not light as a boy's:
     The tresses and tendrils inwoven
       That lure us, the lure of them cloys
               Thee.

               Us
     The joy of the wild woods never
       Leaves free of the thirst it slakes:
     The wild love throbs in us ever
       That burns in the dense hot brakes
               Thus.

               Life,
     Eternal, passionate, awless,
       Insatiable, mutable, dear,
     Makes all men's law for us lawless:
       We strive not: how should we fear
               Strife?

               We,
     The birds and the bright winds know not
       Such joys as are ours in the mild
     Warm woodland; joys such as grow not
       In waste green fields of the wild
               Sea.

               No;
     Long since, in the world's wind veering,
       Thy heart was estranged from me:
     Sweet Echo shall yield thee not hearing:
       What have we to do with thee?
               Go.


     THALASSIUS

               Ay!
     Such wrath on thy nostril quivers
       As once in Sicilian heat
     Bade herdsmen quail, and the rivers
       Shrank, leaving a path for thy feet
               Dry?

               Nay,
     Low down in the hot soft hollow
       Too snakelike hisses thy spleen:
     "O sea-stray, seed of Apollo!"
       What ill hast thou heard or seen?
               Say.

               Man
     Knows well, if he hears beside him
       The snarl of thy wrath at noon,
     What evil may soon betide him,
       Or late, if thou smite not soon,
               Pan.

               Me
     The sound of thy flute, that flatters
       The woods as they smile and sigh,
     Charmed fast as it charms thy satyrs,
       Can charm no faster than I
               Thee.

               Fast
     Thy music may charm the splendid
       Wide woodland silence to sleep
     With sounds and dreams of thee blended
       And whispers of waters that creep
               Past.

               Here
     The spell of thee breathes and passes
       And bids the heart in me pause,
     Hushed soft as the leaves and the grasses
       Are hushed if the storm's foot draws
               Near.

               Yet
     The panic that strikes down strangers
       Transgressing thy ways unaware
     Affrights not me nor endangers
       Through dread of thy secret snare
               Set.


     PAN

               Whence
     May man find heart to deride me?
       Who made his face as a star
     To shine as a God's beside me?
       Nay, get thee away from us, far
               Hence.


     THALASSIUS

               Then
     Shall no man's heart, as he raises
       A hymn to thy secret head,
     Wax great with the godhead he praises:
       Thou, God, shalt be like unto dead
               Men.


     PAN

               Grace
     I take not of men's thanksgiving,
       I crave not of lips that live;
     They die, and behold, I am living,
       While they and their dead Gods give
               Place.


     THALASSIUS

               Yea:
     Too lightly the words were spoken
       That mourned or mocked at thee dead:
     But whose was the word, the token,
       The song that answered and said
               Nay?


     PAN

               Whose
     But mine, in the midnight hidden,
       Clothed round with the strength of night
     And mysteries of things forbidden
       For all but the one most bright
               Muse?


     THALASSIUS

               Hers
     Or thine, O Pan, was the token
       That gave back empire to thee
     When power in thy hands lay broken
       As reeds that quake if a bee
               Stirs?


     PAN

               Whom
     Have I in my wide woods need of?
       Urania's limitless eyes
     Behold not mine end, though they read of
       A word that shall speak to the skies
               Doom.


     THALASSIUS

               She
     Gave back to thee kingdom and glory,
       And grace that was thine of yore,
     And life to thy leaves, late hoary
       As weeds cast up from the hoar
               Sea.

               Song
     Can bid faith shine as the morning
       Though light in the world be none:
     Death shrinks if her tongue sound warning,
       Night quails, and beholds the sun
               Strong.


     PAN

               Night
     Bare rule over men for ages
       Whose worship wist not of me
     And gat but sorrows for wages,
       And hardly for tears could see
               Light.

               Call
     No more on the starry presence
       Whose light through the long dark swam:
     Hold fast to the green world's pleasance:
       For I that am lord of it am
               All.


     THALASSIUS

               God,
     God Pan, from the glad wood's portal
       The breaths of thy song blow sweet:
     But woods may be walked in of mortal
       Man's thought, where never thy feet
               Trod.

               Thine
     All secrets of growth and of birth are,
       All glories of flower and of tree,
     Wheresoever the wonders of earth are;
       The words of the spell of the sea
               Mine.




     A BALLAD OF BATH


     Like a queen enchanted who may not laugh or weep,
       Glad at heart and guarded from change and care like ours,
     Girt about with beauty by days and nights that creep
     Soft as breathless ripples that softly shoreward sweep,
       Lies the lovely city whose grace no grief deflowers.
     Age and grey forgetfulness, time that shifts and veers,
     Touch not thee, our fairest, whose charm no rival nears,
       Hailed as England's Florence of one whose praise gives grace,
     Landor, once thy lover, a name that love reveres:
       Dawn and noon and sunset are one before thy face.

     Dawn whereof we know not, and noon whose fruit we reap,
       Garnered up in record of years that fell like flowers,
     Sunset liker sunrise along the shining steep
     Whence thy fair face lightens, and where thy soft springs leap,
       Crown at once and gird thee with grace of guardian powers
     Loved of men beloved of us, souls that fame inspheres,
     All thine air hath music for him who dreams and hears;
       Voices mixed of multitudes, feet of friends that pace,
     Witness why for ever, if heaven's face clouds or clears,
       Dawn and noon and sunset are one before thy face.

     Peace hath here found harbourage mild as very sleep:
       Not the hills and waters, the fields and wildwood bowers,
     Smile or speak more tenderly, clothed with peace more deep,
     Here than memory whispers of days our memories keep
       Fast with love and laughter and dreams of withered hours.
     Bright were these as blossom of old, and thought endears
     Still the fair soft phantoms that pass with smiles or tears,
       Sweet as roseleaves hoarded and dried wherein we trace
     Still the soul and spirit of sense that lives and cheers:
       Dawn and noon and sunset are one before thy face.

     City lulled asleep by the chime of passing years,
     Sweeter smiles thy rest than the radiance round thy peers;
       Only love and lovely remembrance here have place.
     Time on thee lies lighter than music on men's ears;
       Dawn and noon and sunset are one before thy face.




     IN A GARDEN


               Baby, see the flowers!
                   --Baby sees
                 Fairer things than these,
     Fairer though they be than dreams of ours.

               Baby, hear the birds!
                   --Baby knows
                 Better songs than those,
     Sweeter though they sound than sweetest words.

               Baby, see the moon!
                   --Baby's eyes
                 Laugh to watch it rise,
     Answering light with love and night with noon.

               Baby, hear the sea!
                   --Baby's face
                 Takes a graver grace,
     Touched with wonder what the sound may be.

               Baby, see the star!
                   --Baby's hand
                 Opens, warm and bland,
     Calm in claim of all things fair that are.

               Baby, hear the bells!
                   --Baby's head
                 Bows, as ripe for bed,
     Now the flowers curl round and close their cells.

               Baby, flower of light,
                   Sleep, and see
                 Brighter dreams than we,
     Till good day shall smile away good night.




     A RHYME


     Babe, if rhyme be none
       For that sweet small word
     Babe, the sweetest one
       Ever heard,

     Right it is and meet
       Rhyme should keep not true
     Time with such a sweet
       Thing as you.

     Meet it is that rhyme
       Should not gain such grace:
     What is April's prime
       To your face?

     What to yours is May's
       Rosiest smile? what sound
     Like your laughter sways
       All hearts round?

     None can tell in metre
       Fit for ears on earth
     What sweet star grew sweeter
       At your birth.

     Wisdom doubts what may be:
       Hope, with smile sublime,
     Trusts: but neither, baby,
       Knows the rhyme.

     Wisdom lies down lonely;
       Hope keeps watch from far;
     None but one seer only
       Sees the star.

     Love alone, with yearning
       Heart for astrolabe,
     Takes the star's height, burning
       O'er the babe.




     BABY-BIRD


     Baby-bird, baby-bird,
       Ne'er a song on earth
     May be heard, may be heard,
       Rich as yours in mirth.

     All your flickering fingers,
       All your twinkling toes,
     Play like light that lingers
       Till the clear song close.

     Baby-bird, baby-bird,
       Your grave majestic eyes
     Like a bird's warbled words
       Speak, and sorrow dies.

     Sorrow dies for love's sake,
       Love grows one with mirth,
     Even for one white dove's sake,
       Born a babe on earth.

     Baby-bird, baby-bird,
       Chirping loud and long,
     Other birds hush their words,
       Hearkening toward your song.

     Sweet as spring though it ring,
       Full of love's own lures,
     Weak and wrong sounds their song,
       Singing after yours.

     Baby-bird, baby-bird,
       The happy heart that hears
     Seems to win back within
       Heaven, and cast out fears.

     Earth and sun seem as one
       Sweet light and one sweet word
     Known of none here but one,
       Known of one sweet bird.




     OLIVE


     I

         Who may praise her?
     Eyes where midnight shames the sun,
     Hair of night and sunshine spun,
     Woven of dawn's or twilight's loom,
     Radiant darkness, lustrous gloom,
     Godlike childhood's flowerlike bloom,
     None may praise aright, nor sing
     Half the grace wherewith like spring
         Love arrays her.


     II

         Love untold
     Sings in silence, speaks in light
     Shed from each fair feature, bright
     Still from heaven, whence toward us, now
     Nine years since, she deigned to bow
     Down the brightness of her brow,
     Deigned to pass through mortal birth:
     Reverence calls her, here on earth,
         Nine years old.


     III

         Love's deep duty,
     Even when love transfigured grows
     Worship, all too surely knows
     How, though love may cast out fear,
     Yet the debt divine and dear
     Due to childhood's godhead here
     May by love of man be paid
     Never; never song be made
         Worth its beauty.


     IV

         Nought is all
     Sung or said or dreamed or thought
     Ever, set beside it; nought
     All the love that man may give--
     Love whose prayer should be, "Forgive!"
     Heaven, we see, on earth may live;
     Earth can thank not heaven, we know,
     Save with songs that ebb and flow,
         Rise and fall.


     V

         No man living,
     No man dead, save haply one
     Now gone homeward past the sun,
     Ever found such grace as might
     Tune his tongue to praise aright
     Children, flowers of love and light,
     Whom our praise dispraises: we
     Sing, in sooth, but not as he
         Sang thanksgiving.


     VI

         Hope that smiled,
     Seeing her new-born beauty, made
     Out of heaven's own light and shade,
     Smiled not half so sweetly: love,
     Seeing the sun, afar above,
     Warm the nest that rears the dove,
     Sees, more bright than moon or sun,
     All the heaven of heavens in one
         Little child.


     VII

         Who may sing her?
     Wings of angels when they stir
     Make no music worthy her:
     Sweeter sound her shy soft words
     Here than songs of God's own birds
     Whom the fire of rapture girds
     Round with light from love's face lit;
     Hands of angels find no fit
         Gifts to bring her.


     VIII

         Babes at birth
     Wear as raiment round them cast,
     Keep as witness toward their past,
     Tokens left of heaven; and each,
     Ere its lips learn mortal speech,
     Ere sweet heaven pass on pass reach,
     Bears in undiverted eyes
     Proof of unforgotten skies
         Here on earth.


     IX

         Quenched as embers
     Quenched with flakes of rain or snow
     Till the last faint flame burns low,
     All those lustrous memories lie
     Dead with babyhood gone by:
     Yet in her they dare not die:
     Others, fair as heaven is, yet,
     Now they share not heaven, forget:
         She remembers.




     A WORD WITH THE WIND


     Lord of days and nights that hear thy word of wintry warning,
       Wind, whose feet are set on ways that none may tread,
     Change the nest wherein thy wings are fledged for flight by
           morning,
       Change the harbour whence at dawn thy sails are spread.
     Not the dawn, ere yet the imprisoning night has half released her,
       More desires the sun's full face of cheer, than we,
     Well as yet we love the strength of the iron-tongued north-easter,
       Yearn for wind to meet us as we front the sea.
     All thy ways are good, O wind, and all the world should fester,
       Were thy fourfold godhead quenched, or stilled thy strife:
     Yet the waves and we desire too long the deep south-wester,
       Whence the waters quicken shoreward, clothed with life.
     Yet the field not made for ploughing save of keels nor harrowing
       Save of storm-winds lies unbrightened by thy breath:
     Banded broad with ruddy samphire glow the sea-banks narrowing
       Westward, while the sea gleams chill and still as death.
     Sharp and strange from inland sounds thy bitter note of battle,
       Blown between grim skies and waters sullen-souled,
     Till the baffled seas bear back, rocks roar and shingles rattle,
       Vexed and angered and anhungered and acold.
     Change thy note, and give the waves their will, and all the
           measure,
       Full and perfect, of the music of their might,
     Let it fill the bays with thunderous notes and throbs of pleasure,
       Shake the shores with passion, sound at once and smite.
     Sweet are even the mild low notes of wind and sea, but sweeter
       Sounds the song whose choral wrath of raging rhyme
     Bids the shelving shoals keep tune with storm's imperious metre,
       Bids the rocks and reefs respond in rapturous chime.
     Sweet the lisp and lulling whisper and luxurious laughter,
       Soft as love or sleep, of waves whereon the sun
     Dreams, and dreams not of the darkling hours before nor after,
       Winged with cloud whose wrath shall bid love's day be done.
     Yet shall darkness bring the awakening sea a lordlier lover,
       Clothed with strength more amorous and more strenuous will,
     Whence her heart of hearts shall kindle and her soul recover
       Sense of love too keen to lie for love's sake still.
     Let thy strong south-western music sound, and bid the billows
       Brighten, proud and glad to feel thy scourge and kiss
     Sting and soothe and sway them, bowed as aspens bend or willows,
       Yet resurgent still in breathless rage of bliss.
     All to-day the slow sleek ripples hardly bear up shoreward,
       Charged with sighs more light than laughter, faint and fair,
     Like a woodland lake's weak wavelets lightly lingering forward,
       Soft and listless as the slumber-stricken air.
     Be the sunshine bared or veiled, the sky superb or shrouded,
       Still the waters, lax and languid, chafed and foiled,
     Keen and thwarted, pale and patient, clothed with fire or clouded,
       Vex their heart in vain, or sleep like serpents coiled.
     Thee they look for, blind and baffled, wan with wrath and weary,
       Blown for ever back by winds that rock the bird:
     Winds that seamews breast subdue the sea, and bid the dreary
       Waves be weak as hearts made sick with hope deferred.
     Let thy clarion sound from westward, let the south bear token
       How the glories of thy godhead sound and shine:
     Bid the land rejoice to see the land-wind's broad wings broken,
       Bid the sea take comfort, bid the world be thine.
     Half the world abhors thee beating back the sea, and blackening
       Heaven with fierce and woful change of fluctuant form:
     All the world acclaims thee shifting sail again, and slackening
       Cloud by cloud the close-reefed cordage of the storm.
     Sweeter fields and brighter woods and lordlier hills than waken
       Here at sunrise never hailed the sun and thee:
     Turn thee then, and give them comfort, shed like rain and shaken
       Far as foam that laughs and leaps along the sea.




     NEAP-TIDE


     Far off is the sea, and the land is afar:
         The low banks reach at the sky,
         Seen hence, and are heavenward high;
     Though light for the leap of a boy they are,
         And the far sea late was nigh.

     The fair wild fields and the circling downs,
         The bright sweet marshes and meads
         All glorious with flowerlike weeds,
     The great grey churches, the sea-washed towns,
         Recede as a dream recedes.

     The world draws back, and the world's light wanes,
         As a dream dies down and is dead;
         And the clouds and the gleams overhead
     Change, and change; and the sea remains,
         A shadow of dreamlike dread.

     Wild, and woful, and pale, and grey,
         A shadow of sleepless fear,
         A corpse with the night for bier,
     The fairest thing that beholds the day
         Lies haggard and hopeless here.

     And the wind's wings, broken and spent, subside;
         And the dumb waste world is hoar,
         And strange as the sea the shore;
     And shadows of shapeless dreams abide
         Where life may abide no more.

     A sail to seaward, a sound from shoreward,
         And the spell were broken that seems
         To reign in a world of dreams
     Where vainly the dreamer's feet make forward
         And vainly the low sky gleams.

     The sea-forsaken forlorn deep-wrinkled
         Salt slanting stretches of sand
         That slope to the seaward hand,
     Were they fain of the ripples that flashed and twinkled
         And laughed as they struck the strand?

     As bells on the reins of the fairies ring
         The ripples that kissed them rang,
         The light from the sundawn sprang,
     And the sweetest of songs that the world may sing
         Was theirs when the full sea sang.

     Now no light is in heaven; and now
         Not a note of the sea-wind's tune
         Rings hither: the bleak sky's boon
     Grants hardly sight of a grey sun's brow--
         A sun more sad than the moon.

     More sad than a moon that clouds beleaguer
         And storm is a scourge to smite,
         The sick sun's shadowlike light
     Grows faint as the clouds and the waves wax eager,
         And withers away from sight.

     The day's heart cowers, and the night's heart quickens:
         Full fain would the day be dead
         And the stark night reign in his stead:
     The sea falls dumb as the sea-fog thickens
         And the sunset dies for dread.

     Outside of the range of time, whose breath
         Is keen as the manslayer's knife
         And his peace but a truce for strife,
     Who knows if haply the shadow of death
         May be not the light of life?

     For the storm and the rain and the darkness borrow
         But an hour from the suns to be,
         But a strange swift passage, that we
     May rejoice, who have mourned not to-day, to-morrow,
         In the sun and the wind and the sea.




     BY THE WAYSIDE


     Summer's face was rosiest, skies and woods were mellow,
     Earth had heaven to friend, and heaven had earth to fellow,
       When we met where wooded hills and meadows meet.
     Autumn's face is pale, and all her late leaves yellow,
       Now that here again we greet.

     Wan with years whereof this eightieth nears December,
       Fair and bright with love, the kind old face I know
     Shines above the sweet small twain whose eyes remember
     Heaven, and fill with April's light this pale November,
       Though the dark year's glass run low.

     Like a rose whose joy of life her silence utters
     When the birds are loud, and low the lulled wind mutters,
       Grave and silent shines the boy nigh three years old.
     Wise and sweet his smile, that falters not nor flutters,
       Glows, and turns the gloom to gold.

     Like the new-born sun's that strikes the dark and slays it,
       So that even for love of light it smiles and dies,
     Laughs the boy's blithe face whose fair fourth year arrays it
     All with light of life and mirth that stirs and sways it
       And fulfils the deep wide eyes.

     Wide and warm with glowing laughter's exultation,
     Full of welcome, full of sunbright jubilation,
       Flash my taller friend's quick eyebeams, charged with glee;
     But with softer still and sweeter salutation
       Shine my smaller friend's on me.

     Little arms flung round my bending neck, that yoke it
       Fast in tender bondage, draw my face down too
     Toward the flower-soft face whose dumb deep smiles invoke it;
     Dumb, but love can read the radiant eyes that woke it,
       Blue as June's mid heaven is blue.

     How may men find refuge, how should hearts be shielded,
     From the weapons thus by little children wielded,
       When they lift such eyes as light this lustrous face--
     Eyes that woke love sleeping unawares, and yielded
       Love for love, a gift of grace,

     Grace beyond man's merit, love that laughs, forgiving
       Even the sin of being no more a child, nor worth
     Trust and love that lavish gifts above man's giving,
     Touch or glance of eyes and lips the sweetest living,
       Fair as heaven and kind as earth?




     NIGHT


     I

     FROM THE ITALIAN OF GIOVANNI STROZZI

     Night, whom in shape so sweet thou here may'st see
       Sleeping, was by an Angel sculptured thus
       In marble, and since she sleeps hath life like us:
     Thou doubt'st? Awake her: she will speak to thee.


     II

     FROM THE ITALIAN OF MICHELANGELO BUONARROTI

     Sleep likes me well, and better yet to know
       I am but stone. While shame and grief must be,
       Good hap is mine, to feel not, nor to see:
     Take heed, then, lest thou wake me: ah, speak low.




     IN TIME OF MOURNING


     "Return," we dare not as we fain
       Would cry from hearts that yearn:
     Love dares not bid our dead again
       Return.

       O hearts that strain and burn
     As fires fast fettered burn and strain!
       Bow down, lie still, and learn.

     The heart that healed all hearts of pain
       No funeral rites inurn:
     Its echoes, while the stars remain,
       Return.

     _May 1885._




     THE INTERPRETERS


     I

     Days dawn on us that make amends for many
            Sometimes,
     When heaven and earth seem sweeter even than any
            Man's rhymes.

     Light had not all been quenched in France, or quelled
            In Greece,
     Had Homer sung not, or had Hugo held
            His peace.

     Had Sappho's self not left her word thus long
            For token,
     The sea round Lesbos yet in waves of song
            Had spoken.


     II

     And yet these days of subtler air and finer
            Delight,
     When lovelier looks the darkness, and diviner
            The light--

     The gift they give of all these golden hours,
            Whose urn
     Pours forth reverberate rays or shadowing showers
            In turn--

     Clouds, beams, and winds that make the live day's track
            Seem living--
     What were they did no spirit give them back
            Thanksgiving?


     III

     Dead air, dead fire, dead shapes and shadows, telling
            Time nought;
     Man gives them sense and soul by song, and dwelling
            In thought.

     In human thought their being endures, their power
            Abides:
     Else were their life a thing that each light hour
            Derides.

     The years live, work, sigh, smile, and die, with all
            They cherish;
     The soul endures, though dreams that fed it fall
            And perish.


     IV

     In human thought have all things habitation;
            Our days
     Laugh, lower, and lighten past, and find no station
            That stays.

     But thought and faith are mightier things than time
            Can wrong,
     Made splendid once with speech, or made sublime
            By song.

     Remembrance, though the tide of change that rolls
            Wax hoary,
     Gives earth and heaven, for song's sake and the soul's,
            Their glory.

     _July 16, 1885._




     THE RECALL


     Return, they cry, ere yet your day
       Set, and the sky grow stern:
     Return, strayed souls, while yet ye may
       Return.

       But heavens beyond us yearn;
     Yea, heights of heaven above the sway
       Of stars that eyes discern.

     The soul whose wings from shoreward stray
       Makes toward her viewless bourne
     Though trustless faith and unfaith say,
       Return.




     BY TWILIGHT


     If we dream that desire of the distance above us
     Should be fettered by fear of the shadows that seem,
     If we wake, to be nought, but to hate or to love us
                 If we dream,

     Night sinks on the soul, and the stars as they gleam
     Speak menace or mourning, with tongues to reprove us
     That we deemed of them better than terror may deem.

     But if hope may not lure us, if fear may not move us,
     Thought lightens the darkness wherein the supreme
     Pure presence of death shall assure us, and prove us
                 If we dream.




     A BABY'S EPITAPH


     April made me: winter laid me here away asleep.
     Bright as Maytime was my daytime; night is soft and deep:
     Though the morrow bring forth sorrow, well are ye that weep.

     Ye that held me dear beheld me not a twelvemonth long:
     All the while ye saw me smile, ye knew not whence the song
     Came that made me smile, and laid me here, and wrought you wrong.

     Angels, calling from your brawling world one undefiled,
     Homeward bade me, and forbade me here to rest beguiled:
     Here I sleep not: pass, and weep not here upon your child.




     ON THE DEATH OF SIR HENRY TAYLOR


     Fourscore and five times has the gradual year
       Risen and fulfilled its days of youth and eld
       Since first the child's eyes opening first beheld
     Light, who now leaves behind to help us here
     Light shed from song as starlight from a sphere
       Serene as summer; song whose charm compelled
       The sovereign soul made flesh in Artevelde
     To stand august before us and austere,
     Half sad with mortal knowledge, all sublime
     With trust that takes no taint from change or time,
     Trust in man's might of manhood. Strong and sage,
       Clothed round with reverence of remembering hearts,
     He, twin-born with our nigh departing age,
       Into the light of peace and fame departs.




     IN MEMORY OF JOHN WILLIAM INCHBOLD


     Farewell: how should not such as thou fare well,
       Though we fare ill that love thee, and that live,
     And know, whate'er the days wherein we dwell
       May give us, thee again they will not give?

     Peace, rest, and sleep are all we know of death,
       And all we dream of comfort: yet for thee,
     Whose breath of life was bright and strenuous breath,
       We think the change is other than we see.

     The seal of sleep set on thine eyes to-day
       Surely can seal not up the keen swift light
     That lit them once for ever. Night can slay
       None save the children of the womb of night.

     The fire that burns up dawn to bring forth noon
       Was father of thy spirit: how shouldst thou
     Die as they die for whom the sun and moon
       Are silent? Thee the darkness holds not now:

     Them, while they looked upon the light, and deemed
       That life was theirs for living in the sun,
     The darkness held in bondage: and they dreamed,
       Who knew not that such life as theirs was none.

     To thee the sun spake, and the morning sang
       Notes deep and clear as life or heaven: the sea
     That sounds for them but wild waste music rang
       Notes that were lost not when they rang for thee.

     The mountains clothed with light and night and change,
       The lakes alive with wind and cloud and sun,
     Made answer, by constraint sublime and strange,
       To the ardent hand that bade thy will be done.

     We may not bid the mountains mourn, the sea
       That lived and lightened from thine hand again
     Moan, as of old would men that mourned as we
       A man beloved, a man elect of men,

     A man that loved them. Vain, divine and vain,
       The dream that touched with thoughts or tears of ours
     The spirit of sense that lives in sun and rain,
       Sings out in birds, and breathes and fades in flowers.

     Not for our joy they live, and for our grief
       They die not. Though thine eye be closed, thine hand
     Powerless as mine to paint them, not a leaf
       In English woods or glades of Switzerland

     Falls earlier now, fades faster. All our love
       Moves not our mother's changeless heart, who gives
     A little light to eyes and stars above,
       A little life to each man's heart that lives.

     A little life to heaven and earth and sea,
       To stars and souls revealed of night and day,
     And change, the one thing changeless: yet shall she
       Cease too, perchance, and perish. Who shall say?

     Our mother Nature, dark and sweet as sleep,
       And strange as life and strong as death, holds fast,
     Even as she holds our hearts alive, the deep
       Dumb secret of her first-born births and last.

     But this, we know, shall cease not till the strife
       Of nights and days and fears and hopes find end;
     This, through the brief eternities of life,
       Endures, and calls from death a living friend;

     The love made strong with knowledge, whence confirmed
       The whole soul takes assurance, and the past
     (So by time's measure, not by memory's, termed)
       Lives present life, and mingles first with last.

     I, now long since thy guest of many days,
       Who found thy hearth a brother's, and with thee
     Tracked in and out the lines of rolling bays
       And banks and gulfs and reaches of the sea--

     Deep dens wherein the wrestling water sobs
       And pants with restless pain of refluent breath
     Till all the sunless hollow sounds and throbs
       With ebb and flow of eddies dark as death--

     I know not what more glorious world, what waves
       More bright with life,--if brighter aught may live
     Than those that filled and fled their tidal caves--
       May now give back the love thou hast to give.

     Tintagel, and the long Trebarwith sand,
       Lone Camelford, and Boscastle divine
     With dower of southern blossom, bright and bland
       Above the roar of granite-baffled brine,

     Shall hear no more by joyous night or day
       From downs or causeways good to rove and ride
     Or feet of ours or horse-hoofs urge their way
       That sped us here and there by tower and tide.

     The headlands and the hollows and the waves,
       For all our love, forget us: where I am
     Thou art not: deeper sleeps the shadow on graves
       Than in the sunless gulf that once we swam.

     Thou hast swum too soon the sea of death: for us
       Too soon, but if truth bless love's blind belief
     Faith, born of hope and memory, says not thus:
       And joy for thee for me should mean not grief.

     And joy for thee, if ever soul of man
       Found joy in change and life of ampler birth
     Than here pens in the spirit for a span,
       Must be the life that doubt calls death on earth.

     For if, beyond the shadow and the sleep,
       A place there be for souls without a stain,
     Where peace is perfect, and delight more deep
       Than seas or skies that change and shine again,

     There none of all unsullied souls that live
       May hold a surer station: none may lend
     More light to hope's or memory's lamp, nor give
       More joy than thine to those that called thee friend.

     Yea, joy from sorrow's barren womb is born
       When faith begets on grief the godlike child:
     As midnight yearns with starry sense of morn
       In Arctic summers, though the sea wax wild,

     So love, whose name is memory, thrills at heart,
       Remembering and rejoicing in thee, now
     Alive where love may dream not what thou art
       But knows that higher than hope or love art thou.

     "Whatever heaven, if heaven at all may be,
       Await the sacred souls of good men dead,
     There, now we mourn who loved him here, is he,"
       So, sweet and stern of speech, the Roman said,

     Erect in grief, in trust erect, and gave
       His deathless dead a deathless life even here
     Where day bears down on day as wave on wave
       And not man's smile fades faster than his tear.

     Albeit this gift be given not me to give,
       Nor power be mine to break time's silent spell,
     Not less shall love that dies not while I live
       Bid thee, beloved in life and death, farewell.




     NEW YEAR'S DAY


     New Year, be good to England. Bid her name
       Shine sunlike as of old on all the sea:
       Make strong her soul: set all her spirit free:
     Bind fast her homeborn foes with links of shame
     More strong than iron and more keen than flame:
       Seal up their lips for shame's sake: so shall she
       Who was the light that lightened freedom be,
     For all false tongues, in all men's eyes the same.

     O last-born child of Time, earth's eldest lord,
       God undiscrowned of godhead, who for man
         Begets all good and evil things that live,
     Do thou, his new-begotten son, implored
       Of hearts that hope and fear not, make thy span
         Bright with such light as history bids thee give.


     _Jan. 1, 1889._




     TO SIR RICHARD F. BURTON

     (ON HIS TRANSLATION OF "THE ARABIAN NIGHTS")


     Westward the sun sinks, grave and glad; but far
       Eastward, with laughter and tempestuous tears,
     Cloud, rain, and splendour as of orient spears,
     Keen as the sea's thrill toward a kindling star,
     The sundawn breaks the barren twilight's bar
       And fires the mist and slays it. Years on years
       Vanish, but he that hearkens eastward hears
     Bright music from the world where shadows are.

     Where shadows are not shadows. Hand in hand
     A man's word bids them rise and smile and stand
       And triumph. All that glorious orient glows
     Defiant of the dusk. Our twilight land
       Trembles; but all the heaven is all one rose,
       Whence laughing love dissolves her frosts and snows.




     NELL GWYN


     Sweet heart, that no taint of the throne or the stage
       Could touch with unclean transformation, or alter
       To the likeness of courtiers whose consciences falter
     At the smile or the frown, at the mirth or the rage,
     Of a master whom chance could inflame or assuage,
       Our Lady of Laughter, invoked in no psalter,
       Adored of no faithful that cringe and that palter,
     Praise be with thee yet from a hag-ridden age.

     Our Lady of Pity thou wast: and to thee
     All England, whose sons are the sons of the sea,
       Gives thanks, and will hear not if history snarls
     When the name of the friend of her sailors is spoken;
     And thy lover she cannot but love--by the token
       That thy name was the last on the lips of King Charles.




     CALIBAN ON ARIEL

     "_His backward voice is to utter foul speeches and to detract_"


     The tongue is loosed of that most lying slave,
       Whom stripes may move, not kindness. Listen: "Lo,
       The real god of song, Lord Stephano,
     That's a brave god, if ever god were brave,
     And bears celestial liquor: but," the knave
       (A most ridiculous monster) howls, "we know
       From Ariel's lips what springs of poison flow,
     The chicken-heart blasphemer! Hear him rave!"

     Thou poisonous slave, got by the devil himself
       Upon thy wicked dam, the witch whose name
         Is darkness, and the sun her eyes' offence,
     Though hell's hot sewerage breed no loathlier elf,
       Men cry not shame upon thee, seeing thy shame
         So perfect: they but bid thee--"Hag-seed, hence!"




     THE WEARY WEDDING


     O daughter, why do ye laugh and weep,
         One with another?
     For woe to wake and for will to sleep,
         Mother, my mother.

     But weep ye winna the day ye wed,
         One with another.
     For tears are dry when the springs are dead,
         Mother, my mother.

     Too long have your tears run down like rain,
         One with another.
     For a long love lost and a sweet love slain,
         Mother, my mother.

     Too long have your tears dripped down like dew,
         One with another.
     For a knight that my sire and my brethren slew,
         Mother, my mother.

     Let past things perish and dead griefs lie,
         One with another.
     O fain would I weep not, and fain would I die,
         Mother, my mother.

     Fair gifts we give ye, to laugh and live,
         One with another.
     But sair and strange are the gifts I give,
         Mother, my mother.

     And what will ye give for your father's love?
         One with another.
     Fruits full few and thorns enough,
         Mother, my mother.

     And what will ye give for your mother's sake?
         One with another.
     Tears to brew and tares to bake,
         Mother, my mother.

     And what will ye give your sister Jean?
         One with another.
     A bier to build and a babe to wean,
         Mother, my mother.

     And what will ye give your sister Nell?
         One with another.
     The end of life and beginning of hell,
         Mother, my mother.

     And what will ye give your sister Kate?
         One with another.
     Earth's door and hell's gate,
         Mother, my mother.

     And what will ye give your brother Will?
         One with another.
     Life's grief and world's ill,
         Mother, my mother.

     And what will ye give your brother Hugh?
         One with another.
     A bed of turf to turn into,
         Mother, my mother.

     And what will ye give your brother John?
         One with another.
     The dust of death to feed upon,
         Mother, my mother.

     And what will ye give your bauld bridegroom?
         One with another.
     A barren bed and an empty room,
         Mother, my mother.

     And what will ye give your bridegroom's friend?
         One with another.
     A weary foot to the weary end,
         Mother, my mother.

     And what will ye give your blithe bridesmaid?
         One with another.
     Grief to sew and sorrow to braid,
         Mother, my mother.

     And what will ye drink the day ye're wed?
         One with another.
     But ae drink of the wan well-head,
         Mother, my mother.

     And whatten a water is that to draw?
         One with another.
     We maun draw thereof a', we maun drink thereof a',
         Mother, my mother.

     And what shall ye pu' where the well rins deep?
         One with another.
     Green herb of death, fine flower of sleep,
         Mother, my mother.

     Are there ony fishes that swim therein?
         One with another.
     The white fish grace, and the red fish sin,
         Mother, my mother.

     Are there ony birds that sing thereby?
         One with another.
     O when they come thither they sing till they die,
         Mother, my mother.

     Is there ony draw-bucket to that well-head?
         One with another.
     There's a wee well-bucket hangs low by a thread,
         Mother, my mother.

     And whatten a thread is that to spin?
         One with another.
     It's green for grace, and it's black for sin,
         Mother, my mother.

     And what will ye strew on your bride-chamber floor?
         One with another.
     But one strewing and no more,
         Mother, my mother.

     And whatten a strewing shall that one be?
         One with another.
     The dust of earth and sand of the sea,
         Mother, my mother.

     And what will ye take to build your bed?
         One with another.
     Sighing and shame and the bones of the dead,
         Mother, my mother.

     And what will ye wear for your wedding gown?
         One with another.
     Grass for the green and dust for the brown,
         Mother, my mother.

     And what will ye wear for your wedding lace?
         One with another.
     A heavy heart and a hidden face,
         Mother, my mother.

     And what will ye wear for a wreath to your head?
         One with another.
     Ash for the white and blood for the red,
         Mother, my mother.

     And what will ye wear for your wedding ring?
         One with another.
     A weary thought for a weary thing,
         Mother, my mother.

     And what shall the chimes and the bell-ropes play?
         One with another.
     A weary tune on a weary day,
         Mother, my mother.

     And what shall be sung for your wedding song?
         One with another.
     A weary word of a weary wrong,
         Mother, my mother.

     The world's way with me runs back,
         One with another,
     Wedded in white and buried in black,
         Mother, my mother.

     The world's day and the world's night,
         One with another,
     Wedded in black and buried in white,
         Mother, my mother.

     The world's bliss and the world's teen,
         One with another,
     It's red for white and it's black for green,
         Mother, my mother.

     The world's will and the world's way,
         One with another,
     It's sighing for night and crying for day,
         Mother, my mother.

     The world's good and the world's worth,
         One with another,
     It's earth to flesh and it's flesh to earth,
         Mother, my mother.

            *       *       *       *       *

     When she came out at the kirkyard gate,
         (One with another)
     The bridegroom's mother was there in wait.
         (Mother, my mother.)

     O mother, where is my great green bed,
         (One with another)
     Silk at the foot and gold at the head,
         Mother, my mother?

     Yea, it is ready, the silk and the gold,
         One with another.
     But line it well that I lie not cold,
         Mother, my mother.

     She laid her cheek to the velvet and vair,
         One with another;
     She laid her arms up under her hair.
         (Mother, my mother.)

     Her gold hair fell through her arms fu' low,
         One with another:
     Lord God, bring me out of woe!
         (Mother, my mother.)

     Her gold hair fell in the gay reeds green,
         One with another:
     Lord God, bring me out of teen!
         (Mother, my mother.)

            *       *       *       *       *

     O mother, where is my lady gone?
         (One with another.)
     In the bride-chamber she makes sore moan:
         (Mother, my mother.)

     Her hair falls over the velvet and vair,
         (One with another)
     Her great soft tears fall over her hair.
         (Mother, my mother.)

     When he came into the bride's chamber,
         (One with another)
     Her hands were like pale yellow amber.
         (Mother, my mother.)

     Her tears made specks in the velvet and vair,
         (One with another)
     The seeds of the reeds made specks in her hair.
         (Mother, my mother.)

     He kissed her under the gold on her head;
         (One with another)
     The lids of her eyes were like cold lead.
         (Mother, my mother.)

     He kissed her under the fall of her chin;
         (One with another)
     There was right little blood therein.
         (Mother, my mother.)

     He kissed her under her shoulder sweet;
         (One with another)
     Her throat was weak, with little heat.
         (Mother, my mother.)

     He kissed her down by her breast-flowers red,
         One with another;
     They were like river-flowers dead.
         (Mother, my mother.)

     What ails you now o' your weeping, wife?
         (One with another.)
     It ails me sair o' my very life.
         (Mother, my mother.)

     What ails you now o' your weary ways?
         (One with another.)
     It ails me sair o' my long life-days.
         (Mother, my mother.)

     Nay, ye are young, ye are over fair.
         (One with another.)
     Though I be young, what needs ye care?
         (Mother, my mother.)

     Nay, ye are fair, ye are over sweet.
         (One with another.)
     Though I be fair, what needs ye greet?
         (Mother, my mother.)

     Nay, ye are mine while I hold my life.
         (One with another.)
     O fool, will ye marry the worm for a wife?
         (Mother, my mother.)

     Nay, ye are mine while I have my breath.
         (One with another.)
     O fool, will ye marry the dust of death?
         (Mother, my mother.)

     Yea, ye are mine, we are handfast wed,
         One with another.
     Nay, I am no man's; nay, I am dead,
         Mother, my mother.




     THE WINDS


     O weary fa' the east wind,
       And weary fa' the west:
     And gin I were under the wan waves wide
       I wot weel wad I rest.

     O weary fa' the north wind,
       And weary fa' the south:
     The sea went ower my good lord's head
       Or ever he kissed my mouth.

     Weary fa' the windward rocks,
       And weary fa' the lee:
     They might hae sunken sevenscore ships,
       And let my love's gang free.

     And weary fa' ye, mariners a',
       And weary fa' the sea:
     It might hae taken an hundred men,
       And let my ae love be.




     A LYKE-WAKE SONG


     Fair of face, full of pride,
     Sit ye down by a dead man's side.

     Ye sang songs a' the day:
     Sit down at night in the red worm's way.

     Proud ye were a' day long:
     Ye'll be but lean at evensong.

     Ye had gowd kells on your hair:
     Nae man kens what ye were.

     Ye set scorn by the silken stuff:
     Now the grave is clean enough.

     Ye set scorn by the rubis ring:
     Now the worm is a saft sweet thing.

     Fine gold and blithe fair face,
     Ye are come to a grimly place.

     Gold hair and glad grey een,
     Nae man kens if ye have been.




     A REIVER'S NECK-VERSE


     Some die singing, and some die swinging,
       And weel mot a' they be:
     Some die playing, and some die praying,
       And I wot sae winna we, my dear,
       And I wot sae winna we.

     Some die sailing, and some die wailing,
       And some die fair and free:
     Some die flyting, and some die fighting,
       But I for a fause love's fee, my dear,
       But I for a fause love's fee.

     Some die laughing, and some die quaffing,
       And some die high on tree:
     Some die spinning, and some die sinning,
       But faggot and fire for ye, my dear,
       Faggot and fire for ye.

     Some die weeping, and some die sleeping,
       And some die under sea:
     Some die ganging, and some die hanging,
       And a twine of a tow for me, my dear,
       A twine of a tow for me.




     THE WITCH-MOTHER


     "O where will ye gang to and where will ye sleep,
       Against the night begins?"
     "My bed is made wi' cauld sorrows,
       My sheets are lined wi' sins.

     "And a sair grief sitting at my foot,
       And a sair grief at my head;
     And dule to lay me my laigh pillows,
       And teen till I be dead.

     "And the rain is sair upon my face,
       And sair upon my hair;
     And the wind upon my weary mouth,
       That never may man kiss mair.

     "And the snow upon my heavy lips,
       That never shall drink nor eat;
     And shame to cledding, and woe to wedding,
       And pain to drink and meat.

     "But woe be to my bairns' father,
       And ever ill fare he:
     He has tane a braw bride hame to him,
       Cast out my bairns and me."

     "And what shall they have to their marriage meat
       This day they twain are wed?"
     "Meat of strong crying, salt of sad sighing,
       And God restore the dead."

     "And what shall they have to their wedding wine
       This day they twain are wed?"
     "Wine of weeping, and draughts of sleeping,
       And God raise up the dead."

     She's tane her to the wild woodside,
       Between the flood and fell:
     She's sought a rede against her need
       Of the fiend that bides in hell.

     She's tane her to the wan burnside,
       She's wrought wi' sang and spell:
     She's plighted her soul for doom and dole
       To the fiend that bides in hell.

     She's set her young son to her breast,
       Her auld son to her knee:
     Says, "Weel for you the night, bairnies,
       And weel the morn for me."

     She looked fu' lang in their een, sighing,
       And sair and sair grat she:
     She has slain her young son at her breast,
       Her auld son at her knee.

     She's sodden their flesh wi' saft water,
       She's mixed their blood with wine:
     She's tane her to the braw bride-house,
       Where a' were boun' to dine.

     She poured the red wine in his cup,
       And his een grew fain to greet:
     She set the baked meats at his hand,
       And bade him drink and eat.

     Says, "Eat your fill of your flesh, my lord,
       And drink your fill of your wine;
     For a' thing's yours and only yours
       That has been yours and mine."

     Says, "Drink your fill of your wine, my lord,
       And eat your fill of your bread:
     I would they were quick in my body again,
       Or I that bare them dead."

     He struck her head frae her fair body,
       And dead for grief he fell:
     And there were twae mair sangs in heaven,
       And twae mair sauls in hell.




     THE BRIDE'S TRAGEDY


     "The wind wears roun', the day wears doun,
       The moon is grisly grey;
     There's nae man rides by the mirk muirsides,
       Nor down the dark Tyne's way."
         In, in, out and in,
         Blaws the wind and whirls the whin.

     "And winna ye watch the night wi' me,
       And winna ye wake the morn?
     Foul shame it were that your ae mither
       Should brook her ae son's scorn."
         In, in, out and in,
         Blaws the wind and whirls the whin.

     "O mither, I may not sleep nor stay,
       My weird is ill to dree;
     For a fause faint lord of the south seaboard
       Wad win my bride of me."
         In, in, out and in,
         Blaws the wind and whirls the whin.

     "The winds are strang, and the nights are lang,
       And the ways are sair to ride:
     And I maun gang to wreak my wrang,
       And ye maun bide and bide."
         In, in, out and in,
         Blaws the wind and whirls the whin.

     "Gin I maun bide and bide, Willie,
       I wot my weird is sair:
     Weel may ye get ye a light love yet,
       But never a mither mair."
         In, in, out and in,
         Blaws the wind and whirls the whin.

     "O gin the morrow be great wi' sorrow,
       The wyte be yours of a':
     But though ye slay me that haud and stay me,
       The weird ye will maun fa'."
         In, in, out and in,
         Blaws the wind and whirls the whin.

     When cocks were crawing and day was dawing,
       He's boun' him forth to ride:
     And the ae first may he's met that day
       Was fause Earl Robert's bride.
         In, in, out and in,
         Blaws the wind and whirls the whin.

     O blithe and braw were the bride-folk a',
       But sad and saft rade she;
     And sad as doom was her fause bridegroom,
       But fair and fain was he.
         In, in, out and in,
         Blaws the wind and whirls the whin.

     "And winna ye bide, sae saft ye ride,
       And winna ye speak wi' me?
     For mony's the word and the kindly word
       I have spoken aft wi' thee."
         In, in, out and in,
         Blaws the wind and whirls the whin.

     "My lamp was lit yestreen, Willie,
       My window-gate was wide:
     But ye camena nigh me till day came by me
       And made me not your bride."
         In, in, out and in,
         Blaws the wind and whirls the whin.

     He's set his hand to her bridle-rein,
       He's turned her horse away:
     And the cry was sair, and the wrath was mair,
       And fast and fain rode they.
         In, in, out and in,
         Blaws the wind and whirls the whin.

     But when they came by Chollerford,
       I wot the ways were fell;
     For broad and brown the spate swang down,
       And the lift was mirk as hell.
         In, in, out and in,
         Blaws the wind and whirls the whin.

     "And will ye ride yon fell water,
       Or will ye bide for fear?
     Nae scathe ye'll win o' your father's kin,
       Though they should slay me here."
         In, in, out and in,
         Blaws the wind and whirls the whin.

     "I had liefer ride yon fell water,
       Though strange it be to ride,
     Than I wad stand on the fair green strand
       And thou be slain beside."
         In, in, out and in,
         Blaws the wind and whirls the whin.

     "I had liefer swim yon wild water,
       Though sair it be to bide,
     Than I wad stand at a strange man's hand,
       To be a strange man's bride."
         In, in, out and in,
         Blaws the wind and whirls the whin.

     "I had liefer drink yon dark water,
       Wi' the stanes to make my bed,
     And the faem to hide me, and thou beside me,
       Than I wad see thee dead."
         In, in, out and in,
         Blaws the wind and whirls the whin.

     He's kissed her twice, he's kissed her thrice,
       On cheek and lip and chin:
     He's wound her rein to his hand again,
       And lightly they leapt in.
         In, in, out and in,
         Blaws the wind and whirls the whin.

     Their hearts were high to live or die,
       Their steeds were stark of limb:
     But the stream was starker, the spate was darker,
       Than man might live and swim.
         In, in, out and in,
         Blaws the wind and whirls the whin.

     The first ae step they strode therein,
       It smote them foot and knee:
     But ere they wan to the mid water
       The spate was as the sea.
         In, in, out and in,
         Blaws the wind and whirls the whin.

     But when they wan to the mid water,
       It smote them hand and head:
     And nae man knows but the wave that flows
       Where they lie drowned and dead.
         In, in, out and in,
         Blaws the wind and whirls the whin.




     A JACOBITE'S FAREWELL

     1716


     There's nae mair lands to tyne, my dear,
       And nae mair lives to gie:
     Though a man think sair to live nae mair,
       There's but one day to die.

     For a' things come and a' days gane,
       What needs ye rend your hair?
     But kiss me till the morn's morrow,
       Then I'll kiss ye nae mair.

     O lands are lost and life's losing,
       And what were they to gie?
     Fu' mony a man gives all he can,
       But nae man else gives ye.

     Our king wons ower the sea's water,
       And I in prison sair:
     But I'll win out the morn's morrow,
       And ye'll see me nae mair.




     A JACOBITE'S EXILE

     1746


     The weary day rins down and dies,
       The weary night wears through:
     And never an hour is fair wi' flower,
       And never a flower wi' dew.

     I would the day were night for me,
       I would the night were day:
     For then would I stand in my ain fair land,
       As now in dreams I may.

     O lordly flow the Loire and Seine,
       And loud the dark Durance:
     But bonnier shine the braes of Tyne
       Than a' the fields of France;
     And the waves of Till that speak sae still
       Gleam goodlier where they glance.

     O weel were they that fell fighting
       On dark Drumossie's day:
     They keep their hame ayont the faem,
       And we die far away.

     O sound they sleep, and saft, and deep,
       But night and day wake we;
     And ever between the sea-banks green
       Sounds loud the sundering sea.

     And ill we sleep, sae sair we weep,
       But sweet and fast sleep they;
     And the mool that haps them roun' and laps them
       Is e'en their country's clay;
     But the land we tread that are not dead
       Is strange as night by day.

     Strange as night in a strange man's sight,
       Though fair as dawn it be:
     For what is here that a stranger's cheer
       Should yet wax blithe to see?

     The hills stand steep, the dells lie deep,
       The fields are green and gold:
     The hill-streams sing, and the hill-sides ring,
       As ours at home of old.

     But hills and flowers are nane of ours,
       And ours are oversea:
     And the kind strange land whereon we stand,
       It wotsna what were we
     Or ever we came, wi' scathe and shame,
       To try what end might be.

     Scathe, and shame, and a waefu' name,
       And a weary time and strange,
     Have they that seeing a weird for dreeing
       Can die, and cannot change.

     Shame and scorn may we thole that mourn,
       Though sair be they to dree:
     But ill may we bide the thoughts we hide,
       Mair keen than wind and sea.

     Ill may we thole the night's watches,
       And ill the weary day:
     And the dreams that keep the gates of sleep,
       A waefu' gift gie they;
     For the sangs they sing us, the sights they bring us,
       The morn blaws all away.

     On Aikenshaw the sun blinks braw,
       The burn rins blithe and fain:
     There's nought wi' me I wadna gie
       To look thereon again.

     On Keilder-side the wind blaws wide;
       There sounds nae hunting-horn
     That rings sae sweet as the winds that beat
       Round banks where Tyne is born.

     The Wansbeck sings with all her springs,
       The bents and braes give ear;
     But the wood that rings wi' the sang she sings
       I may not see nor hear;
     For far and far thae blithe burns are,
       And strange is a' thing near.

     The light there lightens, the day there brightens,
       The loud wind there lives free:
     Nae light comes nigh me or wind blaws by me
       That I wad hear or see.

     But O gin I were there again,
       Afar ayont the faem,
     Cauld and dead in the sweet saft bed
       That haps my sires at hame!

     We'll see nae mair the sea-banks fair,
       And the sweet grey gleaming sky,
     And the lordly strand of Northumberland,
       And the goodly towers thereby:
     And none shall know but the winds that blow
       The graves wherein we lie.




     THE TYNESIDE WIDOW


     There's mony a man loves land and life,
       Loves life and land and fee;
     And mony a man loves fair women,
       But never a man loves me, my love,
       But never a man loves me.

     O weel and weel for a' lovers,
       I wot weel may they be;
     And weel and weel for a' fair maidens,
       But aye mair woe for me, my love,
       But aye mair woe for me.

     O weel be wi' you, ye sma' flowers,
       Ye flowers and every tree;
     And weel be wi' you, a' birdies,
       But teen and tears wi' me, my love,
       But teen and tears wi' me.

     O weel be yours, my three brethren,
       And ever weel be ye;
     Wi' deeds for doing and loves for wooing,
       But never a love for me, my love,
       But never a love for me.

     And weel be yours, my seven sisters,
       And good love-days to see,
     And long life-days and true lovers,
       But never a day for me, my love,
       But never a day for me.

     Good times wi' you, ye bauld riders,
       By the hieland and the lee;
     And by the leeland and by the hieland
       It's weary times wi' me, my love,
       It's weary times wi' me.

     Good days wi' you, ye good sailors,
       Sail in and out the sea;
     And by the beaches and by the reaches
       It's heavy days wi' me, my love,
       It's heavy days wi' me.

     I had his kiss upon my mouth,
       His bairn upon my knee;
     I would my soul and body were twain,
       And the bairn and the kiss wi' me, my love,
       And the bairn and the kiss wi' me.

     The bairn down in the mools, my dear,
       O saft and saft lies she;
     I would the mools were ower my head,
       And the young bairn fast wi' me, my love,
       And the young bairn fast wi' me.

     The father under the faem, my dear,
       O sound and sound sleeps he;
     I would the faem were ower my face,
       And the father lay by me, my love,
       And the father lay by me.

     I would the faem were ower my face,
       Or the mools on my ee-bree;
     And waking-time with a' lovers,
       But sleeping-time wi' me, my love,
       But sleeping-time wi' me.

     I would the mools were meat in my mouth,
       The saut faem in my ee;
     And the land-worm and the water-worm
       To feed fu' sweet on me, my love,
       To feed fu' sweet on me.

     My life is sealed with a seal of love,
       And locked with love for a key;
     And I lie wrang and I wake lang,
       But ye tak' nae thought for me, my love,
       But ye tak' nae thought for me.

     We were weel fain of love, my dear,
       O fain and fain were we;
     It was weel with a' the weary world,
       But O, sae weel wi' me, my love,
       But O, sae weel wi' me.

     We were nane ower mony to sleep, my dear,
       I wot we were but three;
     And never a bed in the weary world
       For my bairn and my dear and me, my love,
       For my bairn and my dear and me.




     DEDICATION


     The years are many, the changes more,
     Since wind and sun on the wild sweet shore
       Where Joyous Gard stands stark by the sea
     With face as bright as in years of yore

     Shone, swept, and sounded, and laughed for glee
     More deep than a man's or a child's may be,
       On a day when summer was wild and glad,
     And the guests of the wind and the sun were we.

     The light that lightens from seasons clad
     With darkness now, is it glad or sad?
       Not sad but glad should it shine, meseems,
     On eyes yet fain of the joy they had.

     For joy was there with us; joy that gleams
     And murmurs yet in the world of dreams
       Where thought holds fast, as a constant warder,
     The days when I rode by moors and streams,

     Reining my rhymes into buoyant order
     Through honied leagues of the northland border.
       Though thought or memory fade, and prove
     A faithless keeper, a thriftless hoarder,

     One landmark never can change remove,
     One sign can the years efface not. Love,
       More strong than death or than doubt may be,
     Treads down their strengths, and abides above.

     Yea, change and death are his servants: we,
     Whom love of the dead links fast, though free,
       May smile as they that beheld the dove
     Bear home her signal across the sea.






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Poems and Ballads (Third Series), by 
Algernon Charles Swinburne

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK POEMS AND BALLADS (THIRD SERIES) ***

***** This file should be named 18726.txt or 18726.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/1/8/7/2/18726/

Produced by Paul Murray, Lisa Reigel, and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

*** END: FULL LICENSE ***


﻿Project Gutenberg's Astrophel and Other Poems, by Algernon Charles Swinburne

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Astrophel and Other Poems
       Taken from The Collected Poetical Works of Algernon Charles
       Swinburne, Vol. VI

Author: Algernon Charles Swinburne

Release Date: June 24, 2006 [EBook #18673]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ASTROPHEL AND OTHER POEMS ***




Produced by Paul Murray, Lisa Reigel, and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net





[TRANSCRIBER'S NOTE: Greek words in this text have been transliterated
and placed between +marks+.]




Astrophel and other poems


By

Algernon Charles Swinburne


Taken from The Collected Poetical Works of Algernon Charles
Swinburne--Vol. VI




THE COLLECTED POETICAL WORKS OF ALGERNON CHARLES SWINBURNE

VOL. VI


A MIDSUMMER HOLIDAY: ASTROPHEL: A CHANNEL PASSAGE AND OTHER TALES




SWINBURNE'S POETICAL WORKS

  I. POEMS AND BALLADS (First Series).

 II. SONGS BEFORE SUNRISE, AND SONGS OF TWO NATIONS.

III. POEMS AND BALLADS (Second and Third Series), and SONGS OF THE
       SPRINGTIDES.

 IV. TRISTRAM OF LYONESSE, THE TALE OF BALEN, ATALANTA IN CALYDON,
       ERECHTHEUS.

  V. STUDIES IN SONG, A CENTURY OF ROUNDELS, SONNETS ON ENGLISH DRAMATIC
       POETS, THE HEPTALOGIA, ETC.

 VI. A MIDSUMMER HOLIDAY, ASTROPHEL, A CHANNEL PASSAGE AND OTHER POEMS.


LONDON: WILLIAM HEINEMANN




A MIDSUMMER HOLIDAY: ASTROPHEL: A CHANNEL PASSAGE AND OTHER POEMS

By

Algernon Charles Swinburne


1917

LONDON: WILLIAM HEINEMANN


_First printed_ (_Chatto_), 1904

_Reprinted_ 1904, '09, '10, '12

(_Heinemann_), 1917


_London: William Heinemann_, 1917




ASTROPHEL AND OTHER POEMS


ASTROPHEL                                                  121

A NYMPHOLEPT                                               127

ON THE SOUTH COAST                                         141

AN AUTUMN VISION                                           149

A SWIMMER'S DREAM                                          159

GRACE DARLING                                              164

LOCH TORRIDON                                              171

THE PALACE OF PAN                                          178

A YEAR'S CAROLS                                            181

ENGLAND: AN ODE                                            186

ETON: AN ODE                                               191

THE UNION                                                  194

EAST TO WEST                                               196

INSCRIPTIONS FOR THE FOUR SIDES OF A PEDESTAL              197

ON THE DEATH OF RICHARD BURTON                             199

ELEGY                                                      202

A SEQUENCE OF SONNETS ON THE DEATH OF ROBERT BROWNING      208

SUNSET AND MOONRISE                                        212

BIRTHDAY ODE                                               214

THRENODY                                                   217

THE BALLAD OF MELICERTES                                   220

AU TOMBEAU DE BANVILLE                                     222

LIGHT: AN EPICEDE                                          223

THRENODY                                                   225

A DIRGE                                                    227

A REMINISCENCE                                             229

VIA DOLOROSA                                               230

    I. TRANSFIGURATION                                     231

   II. DELIVERANCE                                         232

  III. THANKSGIVING                                        233

   IV. LIBITINA VERTICORDIA                                234

    V. THE ORDER OF RELEASE                                235

    VI. PSYCHAGOGOS                                        236

   VII. THE LAST WORD                                      237

IN MEMORY OF AURELIO SAFFI                                 238

THE FESTIVAL OF BEATRICE                                   242

THE MONUMENT OF GIORDANO BRUNO                             243

LIFE IN DEATH                                              245

EPICEDE                                                    246

MEMORIAL VERSES ON THE DEATH OF WILLIAM BELL SCOTT         249

AN OLD SAYING                                              253

A MOSS-ROSE                                                254

TO A CAT                                                   255

HAWTHORN DYKE                                              258

THE BROTHERS                                               259

JACOBITE SONG                                              263

THE BALLAD OF DEAD MEN'S BAY                               266

DEDICATION                                                 271




ASTROPHEL AND OTHER POEMS


TO WILLIAM MORRIS




     ASTROPHEL

     AFTER READING SIR PHILIP SIDNEY'S ARCADIA IN THE
     GARDEN OF AN OLD ENGLISH MANOR HOUSE


     I

     A star in the silence that follows
       The song of the death of the sun
     Speaks music in heaven, and the hollows
       And heights of the world are as one;
     One lyre that outsings and outlightens
       The rapture of sunset, and thrills
     Mute night till the sense of it brightens
             The soul that it fills.

     The flowers of the sun that is sunken
       Hang heavy of heart as of head;
     The bees that have eaten and drunken
       The soul of their sweetness are fled;
     But a sunflower of song, on whose honey
       My spirit has fed as a bee,
     Makes sunnier than morning was sunny
             The twilight for me.

     The letters and lines on the pages
       That sundered mine eyes and the flowers
     Wax faint as the shadows of ages
       That sunder their season and ours;
     As the ghosts of the centuries that sever
       A season of colourless time
     From the days whose remembrance is ever,
             As they were, sublime.

     The season that bred and that cherished
       The soul that I commune with yet,
     Had it utterly withered and perished
       To rise not again as it set,
     Shame were it that Englishmen living
       Should read as their forefathers read
     The books of the praise and thanksgiving
             Of Englishmen dead.

     O light of the land that adored thee
       And kindled thy soul with her breath,
     Whose life, such as fate would afford thee,
       Was lovelier than aught but thy death,
     By what name, could thy lovers but know it,
       Might love of thee hail thee afar,
     Philisides, Astrophel, poet
             Whose love was thy star?

     A star in the moondawn of Maytime,
       A star in the cloudland of change;
     Too splendid and sad for the daytime
       To cheer or eclipse or estrange;
     Too sweet for tradition or vision
       To see but through shadows of tears
     Rise deathless across the division
             Of measureless years.

     The twilight may deepen and harden
       As nightward the stream of it runs
     Till starshine transfigure a garden
       Whose radiance responds to the sun's:
     The light of the love of thee darkens
       The lights that arise and that set:
     The love that forgets thee not hearkens
             If England forget.


     II

     Bright and brief in the sight of grief and love the light of thy
           lifetime shone,
     Seen and felt by the gifts it dealt, the grace it gave, and again
           was gone:
     Ay, but now it is death, not thou, whom time has conquered as years
           pass on.

     Ay, not yet may the land forget that bore and loved thee and
           praised and wept,
     Sidney, lord of the stainless sword, the name of names that her
           heart's love kept
     Fast as thine did her own, a sign to light thy life till it sank
           and slept.

     Bright as then for the souls of men thy brave Arcadia resounds and
           shines,
     Lit with love that beholds above all joys and sorrows the steadfast
           signs,
     Faith, a splendour that hope makes tender, and truth, whose presage
           the soul divines.

     All the glory that girds the story of all thy life as with sunlight
           round,
     All the spell that on all souls fell who saw thy spirit, and held
           them bound,
     Lives for all that have heard the call and cadence yet of its music
           sound.

     Music bright as the soul of light, for wings an eagle, for notes a
           dove,
     Leaps and shines from the lustrous lines wherethrough thy soul from
           afar above
     Shone and sang till the darkness rang with light whose fire is the
           fount of love.

     Love that led thee alive, and fed thy soul with sorrows and joys
           and fears,
     Love that sped thee, alive and dead, to fame's fair goal with thy
           peerless peers,
     Feeds the flame of thy quenchless name with light that lightens the
           rayless years.

     Dark as sorrow though night and morrow may lower with presage of
           clouded fame,
     How may she that of old bare thee, may Sidney's England, be brought
           to shame?
     How should this be, while England is? What need of answer beyond
           thy name?


     III

     From the love that transfigures thy glory,
       From the light of the dawn of thy death,
     The life of thy song and thy story
       Took subtler and fierier breath.
     And we, though the day and the morrow
       Set fear and thanksgiving at strife,
     Hail yet in the star of thy sorrow
             The sun of thy life.

     Shame and fear may beset men here, and bid thanksgiving and pride
           be dumb:
     Faith, discrowned of her praise, and wound about with toils till
           her life wax numb,
     Scarce may see if the sundawn be, if darkness die not and dayrise
           come.

     But England, enmeshed and benetted
       With spiritless villainies round,
     With counsels of cowardice fretted,
       With trammels of treason enwound,
     Is yet, though the season be other
       Than wept and rejoiced over thee,
     Thine England, thy lover, thy mother,
             Sublime as the sea.

     Hers wast thou: if her face be now less bright, or seem for an hour
           less brave,
     Let but thine on her darkness shine, thy saviour spirit revive and
           save,
     Time shall see, as the shadows flee, her shame entombed in a
           shameful grave.

     If death and not life were the portal
       That opens on life at the last,
     If the spirit of Sidney were mortal
       And the past of it utterly past,
     Fear stronger than honour was ever,
       Forgetfulness mightier than fame,
     Faith knows not if England should never
             Subside into shame.

     Yea, but yet is thy sun not set, thy sunbright spirit of trust
           withdrawn:
     England's love of thee burns above all hopes that darken or fears
           that fawn:
     Hers thou art: and the faithful heart that hopes begets upon
           darkness dawn.

     The sunset that sunrise will follow
       Is less than the dream of a dream:
     The starshine on height and on hollow
       Sheds promise that dawn shall redeem:
     The night, if the daytime would hide it,
       Shows lovelier, aflame and afar,
     Thy soul and thy Stella's beside it,
             A star by a star.




     A NYMPHOLEPT


     Summer, and noon, and a splendour of silence, felt,
       Seen, and heard of the spirit within the sense.
     Soft through the frondage the shades of the sunbeams melt,
       Sharp through the foliage the shafts of them, keen and dense,
       Cleave, as discharged from the string of the God's bow, tense
     As a war-steed's girth, and bright as a warrior's belt.
       Ah, why should an hour that is heaven for an hour pass hence?

     I dare not sleep for delight of the perfect hour,
       Lest God be wroth that his gift should be scorned of man.
     The face of the warm bright world is the face of a flower,
       The word of the wind and the leaves that the light winds fan
       As the word that quickened at first into flame, and ran,
     Creative and subtle and fierce with invasive power,
       Through darkness and cloud, from the breath of the one God, Pan.

     The perfume of earth possessed by the sun pervades
       The chaster air that he soothes but with sense of sleep.
     Soft, imminent, strong as desire that prevails and fades,
       The passing noon that beholds not a cloudlet weep
       Imbues and impregnates life with delight more deep
     Than dawn or sunset or moonrise on lawns or glades
       Can shed from the skies that receive it and may not keep.

     The skies may hold not the splendour of sundown fast;
       It wanes into twilight as dawn dies down into day.
     And the moon, triumphant when twilight is overpast,
       Takes pride but awhile in the hours of her stately sway.
       But the might of the noon, though the light of it pass away,
     Leaves earth fulfilled of desires and of dreams that last;
       But if any there be that hath sense of them none can say.

     For if any there be that hath sight of them, sense, or trust
       Made strong by the might of a vision, the strength of a dream,
     His lips shall straiten and close as a dead man's must,
       His heart shall be sealed as the voice of a frost-bound stream.
       For the deep mid mystery of light and of heat that seem
     To clasp and pierce dark earth, and enkindle dust,
       Shall a man's faith say what it is? or a man's guess deem?

     Sleep lies not heavier on eyes that have watched all night
       Than hangs the heat of the noon on the hills and trees.
     Why now should the haze not open, and yield to sight
       A fairer secret than hope or than slumber sees?
       I seek not heaven with submission of lips and knees,
     With worship and prayer for a sign till it leap to light:
       I gaze on the gods about me, and call on these.

     I call on the gods hard by, the divine dim powers
       Whose likeness is here at hand, in the breathless air,
     In the pulseless peace of the fervid and silent flowers,
       In the faint sweet speech of the waters that whisper there.
       Ah, what should darkness do in a world so fair?
     The bent-grass heaves not, the couch-grass quails not or cowers;
       The wind's kiss frets not the rowan's or aspen's hair.

     But the silence trembles with passion of sound suppressed,
       And the twilight quivers and yearns to the sunward, wrung
     With love as with pain; and the wide wood's motionless breast
       Is thrilled with a dumb desire that would fain find tongue
       And palpitates, tongueless as she whom a man-snake stung,
     Whose heart now heaves in the nightingale, never at rest
       Nor satiated ever with song till her last be sung.

     Is it rapture or terror that circles me round, and invades
       Each vein of my life with hope--if it be not fear?
     Each pulse that awakens my blood into rapture fades,
       Each pulse that subsides into dread of a strange thing near
       Requickens with sense of a terror less dread than dear.
     Is peace not one with light in the deep green glades
       Where summer at noonday slumbers? Is peace not here?

     The tall thin stems of the firs, and the roof sublime
       That screens from the sun the floor of the steep still wood,
     Deep, silent, splendid, and perfect and calm as time,
       Stand fast as ever in sight of the night they stood,
       When night gave all that moonlight and dewfall could.
     The dense ferns deepen, the moss glows warm as the thyme:
       The wild heath quivers about me: the world is good.

     Is it Pan's breath, fierce in the tremulous maidenhair,
       That bids fear creep as a snake through the woodlands, felt
     In the leaves that it stirs not yet, in the mute bright air,
       In the stress of the sun? For here has the great God dwelt:
       For hence were the shafts of his love or his anger dealt.
     For here has his wrath been fierce as his love was fair,
       When each was as fire to the darkness its breath bade melt.

     Is it love, is it dread, that enkindles the trembling noon,
       That yearns, reluctant in rapture that fear has fed,
     As man for woman, as woman for man? Full soon,
       If I live, and the life that may look on him drop not dead,
       Shall the ear that hears not a leaf quake hear his tread,
     The sense that knows not the sound of the deep day's tune
       Receive the God, be it love that he brings or dread.

     The naked noon is upon me: the fierce dumb spell,
       The fearful charm of the strong sun's imminent might,
     Unmerciful, steadfast, deeper than seas that swell,
       Pervades, invades, appals me with loveless light,
       With harsher awe than breathes in the breath of night.
     Have mercy, God who art all! For I know thee well,
       How sharp is thine eye to lighten, thine hand to smite.

     The whole wood feels thee, the whole air fears thee: but fear
       So deep, so dim, so sacred, is wellnigh sweet.
     For the light that hangs and broods on the woodlands here,
       Intense, invasive, intolerant, imperious, and meet
       To lighten the works of thine hands and the ways of thy feet,
     Is hot with the fire of the breath of thy life, and dear
       As hope that shrivels or shrinks not for frost or heat.

     Thee, thee the supreme dim godhead, approved afar,
       Perceived of the soul and conceived of the sense of man,
     We scarce dare love, and we dare not fear: the star
       We call the sun, that lit us when life began
       To brood on the world that is thine by his grace for a span,
     Conceals and reveals in the semblance of things that are
       Thine immanent presence, the pulse of thy heart's life, Pan.

     The fierce mid noon that wakens and warms the snake
       Conceals thy mercy, reveals thy wrath: and again
     The dew-bright hour that assuages the twilight brake
       Conceals thy wrath and reveals thy mercy: then
       Thou art fearful only for evil souls of men
     That feel with nightfall the serpent within them wake,
       And hate the holy darkness on glade and glen.

     Yea, then we know not and dream not if ill things be,
       Or if aught of the work of the wrong of the world be thine.
     We hear not the footfall of terror that treads the sea,
       We hear not the moan of winds that assail the pine:
       We see not if shipwreck reign in the storm's dim shrine;
     If death do service and doom bear witness to thee
       We see not,--know not if blood for thy lips be wine.

     But in all things evil and fearful that fear may scan,
       As in all things good, as in all things fair that fall,
     We know thee present and latent, the lord of man;
       In the murmuring of doves, in the clamouring of winds that call
       And wolves that howl for their prey; in the midnight's pall,
     In the naked and nymph-like feet of the dawn, O Pan,
       And in each life living, O thou the God who art all.

     Smiling and singing, wailing and wringing of hands,
       Laughing and weeping, watching and sleeping, still
     Proclaim but and prove but thee, as the shifted sands
       Speak forth and show but the strength of the sea's wild will
       That sifts and grinds them as grain in the storm-wind's mill.
     In thee is the doom that falls and the doom that stands:
       The tempests utter thy word, and the stars fulfil.

     Where Etna shudders with passion and pain volcanic
       That rend her heart as with anguish that rends a man's,
     Where Typho labours, and finds not his thews Titanic,
       In breathless torment that ever the flame's breath fans,
       Men felt and feared thee of old, whose pastoral clans
     Were given to the charge of thy keeping; and soundless panic
       Held fast the woodland whose depths and whose heights were Pan's.

     And here, though fear be less than delight, and awe
       Be one with desire and with worship of earth and thee,
     So mild seems now thy secret and speechless law,
       So fair and fearless and faithful and godlike she,
       So soft the spell of thy whisper on stream and sea,
     Yet man should fear lest he see what of old men saw
       And withered: yet shall I quail if thy breath smite me.

     Lord God of life and of light and of all things fair,
       Lord God of ravin and ruin and all things dim,
     Death seals up life, and darkness the sunbright air,
       And the stars that watch blind earth in the deep night swim
       Laugh, saying, "What God is your God, that ye call on him?
     What is man, that the God who is guide of our way should care
       If day for a man be golden, or night be grim?"

     But thou, dost thou hear? Stars too but abide for a span,
       Gods too but endure for a season; but thou, if thou be
     God, more than shadows conceived and adored of man,
       Kind Gods and fierce, that bound him or made him free,
       The skies that scorn us are less in thy sight than we,
     Whose souls have strength to conceive and perceive thee, Pan,
       With sense more subtle than senses that hear and see.

     Yet may not it say, though it seek thee and think to find
       One soul of sense in the fire and the frost-bound clod,
     What heart is this, what spirit alive or blind,
       That moves thee: only we know that the ways we trod
       We tread, with hands unguided, with feet unshod,
     With eyes unlightened; and yet, if with steadfast mind,
       Perchance may we find thee and know thee at last for God.

     Yet then should God be dark as the dawn is bright,
       And bright as the night is dark on the world--no more.
     Light slays not darkness, and darkness absorbs not light;
       And the labour of evil and good from the years of yore
       Is even as the labour of waves on a sunless shore.
     And he who is first and last, who is depth and height,
       Keeps silence now, as the sun when the woods wax hoar.

     The dark dumb godhead innate in the fair world's life
       Imbues the rapture of dawn and of noon with dread,
     Infects the peace of the star-shod night with strife,
       Informs with terror the sorrow that guards the dead.
       No service of bended knee or of humbled head
     May soothe or subdue the God who has change to wife:
       And life with death is as morning with evening wed.

     And yet, if the light and the life in the light that here
       Seem soft and splendid and fervid as sleep may seem
     Be more than the shine of a smile or the flash of a tear,
       Sleep, change, and death are less than a spell-struck dream,
       And fear than the fall of a leaf on a starlit stream.
     And yet, if the hope that hath said it absorb not fear,
       What helps it man that the stars and the waters gleam?

     What helps it man, that the noon be indeed intense,
       The night be indeed worth worship? Fear and pain
     Were lords and masters yet of the secret sense,
       Which now dares deem not that light is as darkness, fain
       Though dark dreams be to declare it, crying in vain.
     For whence, thou God of the light and the darkness, whence
       Dawns now this vision that bids not the sunbeams wane?

     What light, what shadow, diviner than dawn or night,
       Draws near, makes pause, and again--or I dream--draws near?
     More soft than shadow, more strong than the strong sun's light,
       More pure than moonbeams--yea, but the rays run sheer
       As fire from the sun through the dusk of the pinewood, clear
     And constant; yea, but the shadow itself is bright
       That the light clothes round with love that is one with fear.

     Above and behind it the noon and the woodland lie,
       Terrible, radiant with mystery, superb and subdued,
     Triumphant in silence; and hardly the sacred sky
       Seems free from the tyrannous weight of the dumb fierce mood
       Which rules as with fire and invasion of beams that brood
     The breathless rapture of earth till its hour pass by
       And leave her spirit released and her peace renewed.

     I sleep not: never in sleep has a man beholden
       This. From the shadow that trembles and yearns with light
     Suppressed and elate and reluctant--obscure and golden
       As water kindled with presage of dawn or night--
       A form, a face, a wonder to sense and sight,
     Grows great as the moon through the month; and her eyes embolden
       Fear, till it change to desire, and desire to delight.

     I sleep not: sleep would die of a dream so strange;
       A dream so sweet would die as a rainbow dies,
     As a sunbow laughs and is lost on the waves that range
       And reck not of light that flickers or spray that flies.
       But the sun withdraws not, the woodland shrinks not or sighs,
     No sweet thing sickens with sense or with fear of change;
       Light wounds not, darkness blinds not, my steadfast eyes.

     Only the soul in my sense that receives the soul
       Whence now my spirit is kindled with breathless bliss
     Knows well if the light that wounds it with love makes whole,
       If hopes that carol be louder than fears that hiss,
       If truth be spoken of flowers and of waves that kiss,
     Of clouds and stars that contend for a sunbright goal.
       And yet may I dream that I dream not indeed of this?

     An earth-born dreamer, constrained by the bonds of birth,
       Held fast by the flesh, compelled by his veins that beat
     And kindle to rapture or wrath, to desire or to mirth,
       May hear not surely the fall of immortal feet,
       May feel not surely if heaven upon earth be sweet;
     And here is my sense fulfilled of the joys of earth,
       Light, silence, bloom, shade, murmur of leaves that meet.

     Bloom, fervour, and perfume of grasses and flowers aglow,
       Breathe and brighten about me: the darkness gleams,
     The sweet light shivers and laughs on the slopes below,
       Made soft by leaves that lighten and change like dreams;
       The silence thrills with the whisper of secret streams
     That well from the heart of the woodland: these I know:
       Earth bore them, heaven sustained them with showers and beams.

     I lean my face to the heather, and drink the sun
       Whose flame-lit odour satiates the flowers: mine eyes
     Close, and the goal of delight and of life is one:
       No more I crave of earth or her kindred skies.
       No more? But the joy that springs from them smiles and flies:
     The sweet work wrought of them surely, the good work done,
       If the mind and the face of the season be loveless, dies.

     Thee, therefore, thee would I come to, cleave to, cling,
       If haply thy heart be kind and thy gifts be good,
     Unknown sweet spirit, whose vesture is soft in spring,
       In summer splendid, in autumn pale as the wood
       That shudders and wanes and shrinks as a shamed thing should,
     In winter bright as the mail of a war-worn king
       Who stands where foes fled far from the face of him stood.

     My spirit or thine is it, breath of thy life or of mine,
       Which fills my sense with a rapture that casts out fear?
     Pan's dim frown wanes, and his wild eyes brighten as thine,
       Transformed as night or as day by the kindling year.
       Earth-born, or mine eye were withered that sees, mine ear
     That hears were stricken to death by the sense divine,
       Earth-born I know thee: but heaven is about me here.

     The terror that whispers in darkness and flames in light,
       The doubt that speaks in the silence of earth and sea,
     The sense, more fearful at noon than in midmost night,
       Of wrath scarce hushed and of imminent ill to be,
       Where are they? Heaven is as earth, and as heaven to me
     Earth: for the shadows that sundered them here take flight;
       And nought is all, as am I, but a dream of thee.




     ON THE SOUTH COAST

     TO THEODORE WATTS


     Hills and valleys where April rallies his radiant squadron of
           flowers and birds,
     Steep strange beaches and lustrous reaches of fluctuant sea that
           the land engirds,
     Fields and downs that the sunrise crowns with life diviner than
           lives in words,

     Day by day of resurgent May salute the sun with sublime acclaim,
     Change and brighten with hours that lighten and darken, girdled
           with cloud or flame;
     Earth's fair face in alternate grace beams, blooms, and lowers, and
           is yet the same.

     Twice each day the divine sea's play makes glad with glory that
           comes and goes
     Field and street that her waves keep sweet, when past the bounds of
           their old repose,
     Fast and fierce in renewed reverse, the foam-flecked estuary ebbs
           and flows.

     Broad and bold through the stays of old staked fast with trunks of
           the wildwood tree,
     Up from shoreward, impelled far forward, by marsh and meadow, by
           lawn and lea,
     Inland still at her own wild will swells, rolls, and revels the
           surging sea.

     Strong as time, and as faith sublime,--clothed round with shadows
           of hopes and fears,
     Nights and morrows, and joys and sorrows, alive with passion of
           prayers and tears,--
     Stands the shrine that has seen decline eight hundred waxing and
           waning years.

     Tower set square to the storms of air and change of season that
           glooms and glows,
     Wall and roof of it tempest-proof, and equal ever to suns and
           snows,
     Bright with riches of radiant niches and pillars smooth as a
           straight stem grows.

     Aisle and nave that the whelming wave of time has whelmed not or
           touched or neared,
     Arch and vault without stain or fault, by hands of craftsmen we
           know not reared,
     Time beheld them, and time was quelled; and change passed by them
           as one that feared.

     Time that flies as a dream, and dies as dreams that die with the
           sleep they feed,
     Here alone in a garb of stone incarnate stands as a god indeed,
     Stern and fair, and of strength to bear all burdens mortal to man's
           frail seed.

     Men and years are as leaves or tears that storm or sorrow is fain
           to shed:
     These go by as the winds that sigh, and none takes note of them
           quick or dead:
     Time, whose breath is their birth and death, folds here his
           pinions, and bows his head.

     Still the sun that beheld begun the work wrought here of unwearied
           hands
     Sees, as then, though the Red King's men held ruthless rule over
           lawless lands,
     Stand their massive design, impassive, pure and proud as a virgin
           stands.

     Statelier still as the years fulfil their count, subserving her
           sacred state,
     Grows the hoary grey church whose story silence utters and age
           makes great:
     Statelier seems it than shines in dreams the face unveiled of
           unvanquished fate.

     Fate, more high than the star-shown sky, more deep than waters
           unsounded, shines
     Keen and far as the final star on souls that seek not for charms or
           signs;
     Yet more bright is the love-shown light of men's hands lighted in
           songs or shrines.

     Love and trust that the grave's deep dust can soil not, neither may
           fear put out,
     Witness yet that their record set stands fast, though years be as
           hosts in rout,
     Spent and slain; but the signs remain that beat back darkness and
           cast forth doubt.

     Men that wrought by the grace of thought and toil things goodlier
           than praise dare trace,
     Fair as all that the world may call most fair, save only the sea's
           own face,
     Shrines or songs that the world's change wrongs not, live by grace
           of their own gift's grace.

     Dead, their names that the night reclaims--alive, their works that
           the day relumes--
     Sink and stand, as in stone and sand engraven: none may behold
           their tombs:
     Nights and days shall record their praise while here this flower of
           their grafting blooms.

     Flower more fair than the sun-thrilled air bids laugh and lighten
           and wax and rise,
     Fruit more bright than the fervent light sustains with strength
           from the kindled skies,
     Flower and fruit that the deathless root of man's love rears though
           the man's name dies.

     Stately stands it, the work of hands unknown of: statelier, afar
           and near,
     Rise around it the heights that bound our landward gaze from the
           seaboard here;
     Downs that swerve and aspire, in curve and change of heights that
           the dawn holds dear.

     Dawn falls fair on the grey walls there confronting dawn, on the
           low green lea,
     Lone and sweet as for fairies' feet held sacred, silent and strange
           and free,
     Wild and wet with its rills; but yet more fair falls dawn on the
           fairer sea.

     Eastward, round by the high green bound of hills that fold the
           remote fields in,
     Strive and shine on the low sea-line fleet waves and beams when the
           days begin;
     Westward glow, when the days burn low, the sun that yields and the
           stars that win.

     Rose-red eve on the seas that heave sinks fair as dawn when the
           first ray peers;
     Winds are glancing from sunbright Lancing to Shoreham, crowned with
           the grace of years;
     Shoreham, clad with the sunset, glad and grave with glory that
           death reveres.

     Death, more proud than the kings' heads bowed before him, stronger
           than all things, bows
     Here his head: as if death were dead, and kingship plucked from his
           crownless brows,
     Life hath here such a face of cheer as change appals not and time
           avows.

     Skies fulfilled with the sundown, stilled and splendid, spread as a
           flower that spreads,
     Pave with rarer device and fairer than heaven's the luminous
           oyster-beds,
     Grass-embanked, and in square plots ranked, inlaid with gems that
           the sundown sheds.

     Squares more bright and with lovelier light than heaven that
           kindled it shines with shine
     Warm and soft as the dome aloft, but heavenlier yet than the sun's
           own shrine:
     Heaven is high, but the water-sky lit here seems deeper and more
           divine.

     Flowers on flowers, that the whole world's bowers may show not,
           here may the sunset show,
     Lightly graven in the waters paven with ghostly gold by the clouds
           aglow:
     Bright as love is the vault above, but lovelier lightens the wave
           below.

     Rosy grey, or as fiery spray full-plumed, or greener than emerald,
           gleams
     Plot by plot as the skies allot for each its glory, divine as
           dreams
     Lit with fire of appeased desire which sounds the secret of all
           that seems;

     Dreams that show what we fain would know, and know not save by the
           grace of sleep,
     Sleep whose hands have removed the bands that eyes long waking and
           fain to weep
     Feel fast bound on them--light around them strange, and darkness
           above them steep.

     Yet no vision that heals division of love from love, and renews
           awhile
     Life and breath in the lips where death has quenched the spirit of
           speech and smile,
     Shows on earth, or in heaven's mid mirth, where no fears enter or
           doubts defile,

     Aught more fair than the radiant air and water here by the twilight
           wed,
     Here made one by the waning sun whose last love quickens to
           rosebright red
     Half the crown of the soft high down that rears to northward its
           wood-girt head.

     There, when day is at height of sway, men's eyes who stand, as we
           oft have stood,
     High where towers with its world of flowers the golden spinny that
           flanks the wood,
     See before and around them shore and seaboard glad as their gifts
           are good.

     Higher and higher to the north aspire the green smooth-swelling
           unending downs;
     East and west on the brave earth's breast glow girdle-jewels of
           gleaming towns;
     Southward shining, the lands declining subside in peace that the
           sea's light crowns.

     Westward wide in its fruitful pride the plain lies lordly with
           plenteous grace;
     Fair as dawn's when the fields and lawns desire her glitters the
           glad land's face:
     Eastward yet is the sole sign set of elder days and a lordlier
           race.

     Down beneath us afar, where seethe in wilder weather the tides
           aflow,
     Hurled up hither and drawn down thither in quest of rest that they
           may not know,
     Still as dew on a flower the blue broad stream now sleeps in the
           fields below.

     Mild and bland in the fair green land it smiles, and takes to its
           heart the sky;
     Scarce the meads and the fens, the reeds and grasses, still as they
           stand or lie,
     Wear the palm of a statelier calm than rests on waters that pass
           them by.

     Yet shall these, when the winds and seas of equal days and coequal
           nights
     Rage, rejoice, and uplift a voice whose sound is even as a sword
           that smites,
     Felt and heard as a doomsman's word from seaward reaches to
           landward heights,

     Lift their heart up, and take their part of triumph, swollen and
           strong with rage,
     Rage elate with desire and great with pride that tempest and storm
           assuage;
     So their chime in the ear of time has rung from age to rekindled
           age.

     Fair and dear is the land's face here, and fair man's work as a
           man's may be:
     Dear and fair as the sunbright air is here the record that speaks
           him free;
     Free by birth of a sacred earth, and regent ever of all the sea.




     AN AUTUMN VISION

     OCTOBER 31, 1889

     +Zephyrou gigantos aura+


     I

     Is it Midsummer here in the heavens that illumine October on earth?
     Can the year, when his heart is fulfilled with desire of the days
           of his mirth,
         Redeem them, recall, or remember?
     For a memory recalling the rapture of earth, and redeeming the sky,
     Shines down from the heights to the depths: will the watchword of
           dawn be July
         When to-morrow acclaims November?
     The stern salutation of sorrow to death or repentance to shame
     Was all that the season was wont to accord her of grace or acclaim;
         No lightnings of love and of laughter.
     But here, in the laugh of the loud west wind from around and above,
     In the flash of the waters beneath him, what sound or what light
           but of love
         Rings round him or leaps forth after?


     II

     Wind beloved of earth and sky and sea beyond all winds that blow,
       Wind whose might in fight was England's on her mightiest warrior
           day,
     South-west wind, whose breath for her was life, and fire to scourge
           her foe,
       Steel to smite and death to drive him down an unreturning way,
     Well-beloved and welcome, sounding all the clarions of the sky,
       Rolling all the marshalled waters toward the charge that storms
           the shore,
     We receive, acclaim, salute thee, we who live and dream and die,
       As the mightiest mouth of song that ever spake acclaimed of yore.
     We that live as they that perish praise thee, lord of cloud and
           wave,
       Wind of winds, clothed on with darkness whence as lightning light
           comes forth,
     We that know thee strong to guard and smite, to scatter and to
           save,
       We to whom the south-west wind is dear as Athens held the north.
     He for her waged war as thou for us against all powers defiant,
       Fleets full-fraught with storm from Persia, laden deep with death
           from Spain:
     Thee the giant god of song and battle hailed as god and giant,
       Yet not his but ours the land is whence thy praise should ring
           and rain;
     Rain as rapture shed from song, and ring as trumpets blown for
           battle,
       Sound and sing before thee, loud and glad as leaps and sinks the
           sea:
     Yea, the sea's white steeds are curbed and spurred of thee, and
           pent as cattle,
       Yet they laugh with love and pride to live, subdued not save of
           thee.
     Ears that hear thee hear in heaven the sound of widening wings
           gigantic,
       Eyes that see the cloud-lift westward see thy darkening brows
           divine;
     Wings whose measure is the limit of the limitless Atlantic,
       Brows that bend, and bid the sovereign sea submit her soul to
           thine.


     III

     Twelve days since is it--twelve days gone,
     Lord of storm, that a storm-bow shone
     Higher than sweeps thy sublime dark wing,
     Fair as dawn is and sweet like spring?

     Never dawn in the deep wide east
     Spread so splendid and strange a feast,
     Whence the soul as it drank and fed
     Felt such rapture of wonder shed.

     Never spring in the wild wood's heart
     Felt such flowers at her footfall start,
     Born of earth, as arose on sight
     Born of heaven and of storm and light.

     Stern and sullen, the grey grim sea
     Swelled and strove as in toils, though free,
     Free as heaven, and as heaven sublime,
     Clear as heaven of the toils of time.


     IV

     Suddenly, sheer from the heights to the depths of the sky and the
           sea,
     Sprang from the darkness alive as a vision of life to be
     Glory triune and transcendent of colour afar and afire,
     Arching and darkening the darkness with light as of dream or
           desire.
     Heaven, in the depth of its height, shone wistful and wan from
           above:
     Earth from beneath, and the sea, shone stricken and breathless with
           love.
     As a shadow may shine, so shone they; as ghosts of the viewless
           blest,
     That sleep hath sight of alive in a rapture of sunbright rest,
     The green earth glowed and the grey sky gleamed for a wondrous
           while;
     And the storm's full frown was crossed by the light of its own deep
           smile.
     As the darkness of thought and of passion is touched by the light
           that gives
     Life deathless as love from the depth of a spirit that sees and
           lives,
     From the soul of a seer and a singer, wherein as a scroll unfurled
     Lies open the scripture of light and of darkness, the word of the
           world,
     So, shapeless and measureless, lurid as anguish and haggard as
           crime,
     Pale as the front of oblivion and dark as the heart of time,
     The wild wan heaven at its height was assailed and subdued and made
     More fair than the skies that know not of storm and endure not
           shade.
     The grim sea-swell, grey, sleepless, and sad as a soul estranged,
     Shone, smiled, took heart, and was glad of its wrath: and the
           world's face changed.


     V

     Up from moorlands northward gleaming
       Even to heaven's transcendent height,
     Clothed with massive cloud, and seeming
       All one fortress reared of night,
     Down to where the deep sea, dreaming
       Angry dreams, lay dark and white,
     White as death and dark as fate,
     Heaving with the strong wind's weight,
     Sad with stormy pride of state,
     One full rainbow shone elate.

     Up from inmost memory's dwelling
       Where the light of life abides,
     Where the past finds tongue, foretelling
       Time that comes and grace that guides,
     Power that saves and sways, compelling
       Souls that ebb and flow like tides,
     Shone or seemed to shine and swim
     Through the cloud-surf great and grim,
     Thought's live surge, the soul of him
     By whose light the sun looks dim.

     In what synod were they sitting,
       All the gods and lords of time,
     Whence they watched as fen-fires flitting
       Years and names of men sublime,
     When their counsels found it fitting
       One should stand where none might climb--
     None of man begotten, none
     Born of men beneath the sun
     Till the race of time be run,
     Save this heaven-enfranchised one?

     With what rapture of creation
       Was the soul supernal thrilled,
     With what pride of adoration
       Was the world's heart fired and filled,
     Heaved in heavenward exaltation
       Higher than hopes or dreams might build,
     Grave with awe not known while he
     Was not, mad with glorious glee
     As the sun-saluted sea,
     When his hour bade Shakespeare be?


     VI

     There, clear as night beholds her crowning seven,
     The sea beheld his likeness set in heaven.
     The shadow of his spirit full in sight
     Shone: for the shadow of that soul is light.
     Nor heaven alone bore witness: earth avowed
     Him present, and acclaimed of storm aloud.
     From the arching sky to the ageless hills and sea
     The whole world, visible, audible, was he:
     Each part of all that wove that wondrous whole
     The raiment of the presence of his soul.
     The sun that smote and kissed the dark to death
     Spake, smiled, and strove, like song's triumphant breath;
     The soundless cloud whose thunderous heart was dumb
     Swelled, lowered, and shrank to feel its conqueror come.
     Yet high from heaven its empire vast and vain
     Frowned, and renounced not night's reluctant reign.
     The serpentine swift sounds and shapes wherein
     The stainless sea mocks earth and death and sin,
     Crawls dark as craft, or flashes keen as hate,
     Subdued and insubmissive, strong like fate
     And weak like man, bore wrathful witness yet
     That storms and sins are more than suns that set;
     That evil everlasting, girt for strife
     Eternal, wars with hope as death with life.
     The dark sharp shifting wind that bade the waves
     Falter, lose heart, bow down like foes made slaves,
     And waxed within more bitter as they bowed,
     Baffling the sea, swallowing the sun with cloud,
     Devouring fast as fire on earth devours
     And hungering hard as frost that feeds on flowers,
     Clothed round with fog that reeked as fume from hell,
     And darkening with its miscreative spell
     Light, glad and keen and splendid as the sword
     Whose heft had known Othello's hand its lord,
     Spake all the soul that hell drew back to greet
     And felt its fire shrink shuddering from his feet.
     Far off the darkness darkened, and recoiled,
     And neared again, and triumphed: and the coiled
     Colourless cloud and sea discoloured grew
     Conscious of horror huge as heaven, and knew
     Where Goneril's soul made chill and foul the mist,
     And all the leprous life in Regan hissed.
     Fierce homeless ghosts, rejected of the pit,
     From hell to hell of storm fear watched them flit.
     About them and before, the dull grey gloom
     Shuddered, and heaven seemed hateful as the tomb
     That shrinks from resurrection; and from out
     That sullen hell which girt their shades about
     The nether soul that lurks and lowers within
     Man, made of dust and fire and shame and sin,
     Breathed: all the cloud that felt it breathe and blight
     Was blue as plague or black as thunderous night.
     Elect of hell, the children of his hate
     Thronged, as to storm sweet heaven's triumphal gate.
     The terror of his giving rose and shone
     Imminent: life had put its likeness on.
     But higher than all its horrent height of shade
     Shone sovereign, seen by light itself had made,
     Above the woes of all the world, above
     Life, sin, and death, his myriad-minded love.
     From landward heights whereon the radiance leant
     Full-fraught from heaven, intense and imminent,
     To depths wherein the seething strengths of cloud
     Scarce matched the wrath of waves whereon they bowed,
     From homeborn pride and kindling love of home
     To the outer skies and seas of fire and foam,
     From splendour soft as dew that sundawn thrills
     To gloom that shudders round the world it fills,
     From midnights murmuring round Titania's ear
     To midnights maddening round the rage of Lear,
     The wonder woven of storm and sun became
     One with the light that lightens from his name.
     The music moving on the sea that felt
     The storm-wind even as snows of springtide melt
     Was blithe as Ariel's hand or voice might make
     And bid all grief die gladly for its sake.
     And there the soul alive in ear and eye
     That watched the wonders of an hour pass by
     Saw brighter than all stars that heaven inspheres
     The silent splendour of Cordelia's tears,
     Felt in the whispers of the quickening wind
     The radiance of the laugh of Rosalind,
     And heard, in sounds that melt the souls of men
     With love of love, the tune of Imogen.


     VII

     For the strong north-east is not strong to subdue and to slay the
           divine south-west,
     And the darkness is less than the light that it darkens, and dies
           in reluctant rest.
     It hovers and hangs on the labouring and trembling ascent of the
           dawn from the deep,
     Till the sun's eye quicken the world and the waters, and smite it
           again into sleep.
     Night, holy and starry, the fostress of souls, with the fragrance
           of heaven in her breath,
     Subdues with the sense of her godhead the forces and mysteries of
           sorrow and death.
     Eternal as dawn's is the comfort she gives: but the mist that
           beleaguers and slays
     Comes, passes, and is not: the strength of it withers, appalled or
           assuaged by the day's.
     Faith, haggard as Fear that had borne her, and dark as the sire
           that begat her, Despair,
     Held rule on the soul of the world and the song of it saddening
           through ages that were;
     Dim centuries that darkened and brightened and darkened again, and
           the soul of their song
     Was great as their grief, and sublime as their suffering, and
           strong as their sorrows were strong.
     It knew not, it saw not, but shadows triune, and evoked by the
           strength of their spell
     Dark hell, and the mountain of anguish, and heaven that was
           hollower and harder than hell.
     These are not: the womb of the darkness that bare them rejects
           them, and knows them no more:
     Thought, fettered in misery and iron, revives in the light that it
           lived in of yore.
     For the soul that is wisdom and freedom, the spirit of England
           redeemed from her past,
     Speaks life through the lips of the master and lord of her
           children, the first and the last.
     Thought, touched by his hand and redeemed by his breath, sees,
           hears, and accepts from above
     The limitless lightnings of vision and passion, the measureless
           music of love.




     A SWIMMER'S DREAM

     NOVEMBER 4, 1889

     _Somno mollior unda_


     I

     Dawn is dim on the dark soft water,
       Soft and passionate, dark and sweet.
     Love's own self was the deep sea's daughter,
       Fair and flawless from face to feet,
     Hailed of all when the world was golden,
     Loved of lovers whose names beholden
     Thrill men's eyes as with light of olden
       Days more glad than their flight was fleet.

     So they sang: but for men that love her,
       Souls that hear not her word in vain,
     Earth beside her and heaven above her
       Seem but shadows that wax and wane.
     Softer than sleep's are the sea's caresses,
     Kinder than love's that betrays and blesses,
     Blither than spring's when her flowerful tresses
       Shake forth sunlight and shine with rain.

     All the strength of the waves that perish
       Swells beneath me and laughs and sighs,
     Sighs for love of the life they cherish,
       Laughs to know that it lives and dies,
     Dies for joy of its life, and lives
     Thrilled with joy that its brief death gives--
     Death whose laugh or whose breath forgives
       Change that bids it subside and rise.


     II

     Hard and heavy, remote but nearing,
       Sunless hangs the severe sky's weight,
     Cloud on cloud, though the wind be veering
       Heaped on high to the sundawn's gate.
     Dawn and even and noon are one,
     Veiled with vapour and void of sun;
     Nought in sight or in fancied hearing
       Now less mighty than time or fate.

     The grey sky gleams and the grey seas glimmer,
       Pale and sweet as a dream's delight,
     As a dream's where darkness and light seem dimmer,
       Touched by dawn or subdued by night.
     The dark wind, stern and sublime and sad,
     Swings the rollers to westward, clad
     With lustrous shadow that lures the swimmer,
       Lures and lulls him with dreams of light.

     Light, and sleep, and delight, and wonder,
       Change, and rest, and a charm of cloud,
     Fill the world of the skies whereunder
       Heaves and quivers and pants aloud
     All the world of the waters, hoary
     Now, but clothed with its own live glory,
     That mates the lightning and mocks the thunder
       With light more living and word more proud.


     III

     Far off westward, whither sets the sounding strife,
       Strife more sweet than peace, of shoreless waves whose glee
       Scorns the shore and loves the wind that leaves them free,
     Strange as sleep and pale as death and fair as life,
       Shifts the moonlight-coloured sunshine on the sea.

     Toward the sunset's goal the sunless waters crowd,
       Fast as autumn days toward winter: yet it seems
       Here that autumn wanes not, here that woods and streams
     Lose not heart and change not likeness, chilled and bowed,
       Warped and wrinkled: here the days are fair as dreams.


     IV

     O russet-robed November,
       What ails thee so to smile?
     Chill August, pale September,
       Endured a woful while,
     And fell as falls an ember
       From forth a flameless pile:
     But golden-girt November
         Bids all she looks on smile.

     The lustrous foliage, waning
       As wanes the morning moon,
     Here falling, here refraining,
       Outbraves the pride of June
     With statelier semblance, feigning
       No fear lest death be soon:
     As though the woods thus waning
       Should wax to meet the moon.

     As though, when fields lie stricken
       By grey December's breath,
     These lordlier growths that sicken
       And die for fear of death
     Should feel the sense requicken
       That hears what springtide saith
     And thrills for love, spring-stricken
       And pierced with April's breath.

     The keen white-winged north-easter
       That stings and spurs thy sea
     Doth yet but feed and feast her
       With glowing sense of glee:
     Calm chained her, storm released her,
       And storm's glad voice was he:
     South-wester or north-easter,
       Thy winds rejoice the sea.


     V

     A dream, a dream is it all--the season,
       The sky, the water, the wind, the shore?
     A day-born dream of divine unreason,
       A marvel moulded of sleep--no more?
     For the cloudlike wave that my limbs while cleaving
     Feel as in slumber beneath them heaving
     Soothes the sense as to slumber, leaving
       Sense of nought that was known of yore.

     A purer passion, a lordlier leisure,
       A peace more happy than lives on land,
     Fulfils with pulse of diviner pleasure
       The dreaming head and the steering hand.
     I lean my cheek to the cold grey pillow,
     The deep soft swell of the full broad billow,
     And close mine eyes for delight past measure,
       And wish the wheel of the world would stand.

     The wild-winged hour that we fain would capture
       Falls as from heaven that its light feet clomb,
     So brief, so soft, and so full the rapture
       Was felt that soothed me with sense of home.
     To sleep, to swim, and to dream, for ever--
     Such joy the vision of man saw never;
     For here too soon will a dark day sever
       The sea-bird's wing from the sea-wave's foam.

     A dream, and more than a dream, and dimmer
       At once and brighter than dreams that flee,
     The moment's joy of the seaward swimmer
       Abides, remembered as truth may be.
     Not all the joy and not all the glory
     Must fade as leaves when the woods wax hoary;
     For there the downs and the sea-banks glimmer,
       And here to south of them swells the sea.




     GRACE DARLING


     Take, O star of all our seas, from not an alien hand,
       Homage paid of song bowed down before thy glory's face,
     Thou the living light of all our lovely stormy strand,
       Thou the brave north-country's very glory of glories, Grace.

     Loud and dark about the lighthouse rings and glares the night;
       Glares with foam-lit gloom and darkling fire of storm and spray,
     Rings with roar of winds in chase and rage of waves in flight,
       Howls and hisses as with mouths of snakes and wolves at bay.
     Scarce the cliffs of the islets, scarce the walls of Joyous Gard,
       Flash to sight between the deadlier lightnings of the sea:
     Storm is lord and master of a midnight evil-starred,
       Nor may sight or fear discern what evil stars may be.
     Dark as death and white as snow the sea-swell scowls and shines,
       Heaves and yearns and pants for prey, from ravening lip to lip,
     Strong in rage of rapturous anguish, lines on hurtling lines,
       Ranks on charging ranks, that break and rend the battling ship.
     All the night is mad and murderous: who shall front the night?
       Not the prow that labours, helpless as a storm-blown leaf,
     Where the rocks and waters, darkling depth and beetling height,
       Rage with wave on shattering wave and thundering reef on reef.
     Death is fallen upon the prisoners there of darkness, bound
       Like as thralls with links of iron fast in bonds of doom;
     How shall any way to break the bands of death be found,
       Any hand avail to pluck them from that raging tomb?
     All the night is great with child of death: no stars above
       Show them hope in heaven, no lights from shores ward help on
           earth.
     Is there help or hope to seaward, is there help in love,
       Hope in pity, where the ravening hounds of storm make mirth?
     Where the light but shows the naked eyeless face of Death
       Nearer, laughing dumb and grim across the loud live storm?
     Not in human heart or hand or speech of human breath,
       Surely, nor in saviours found of mortal face or form.
     Yet below the light, between the reefs, a skiff shot out
       Seems a sea-bird fain to breast and brave the strait fierce pass
     Whence the channelled roar of waters driven in raging rout,
       Pent and pressed and maddened, speaks their monstrous might and
           mass.
     Thunder heaves and howls about them, lightning leaps and flashes,
       Hard at hand, not high in heaven, but close between the walls
     Heaped and hollowed of the storms of old, whence reels and crashes
       All the rage of all the unbaffled wave that breaks and falls.
     Who shall thwart the madness and the gladness of it, laden
       Full with heavy fate, and joyous as the birds that whirl?
     Nought in heaven or earth, if not one mortal-moulded maiden,
       Nought if not the soul that glorifies a northland girl.
     Not the rocks that break may baffle, not the reefs that thwart
       Stay the ravenous rapture of the waves that crowd and leap;
     Scarce their flashing laughter shows the hunger of their heart,
       Scarce their lion-throated roar the wrath at heart they keep.
     Child and man and woman in the grasp of death clenched fast
       Tremble, clothed with darkness round about, and scarce draw
           breath,
     Scarce lift eyes up toward the light that saves not, scarce may
           cast
       Thought or prayer up, caught and trammelled in the snare of
           death.
     Not as sea-mews cling and laugh or sun their plumes and sleep
       Cling and cower the wild night's waifs of shipwreck, blind with
           fear,
     Where the fierce reef scarce yields foothold that a bird might
           keep,
       And the clamorous darkness deadens eye and deafens ear.
     Yet beyond their helpless hearing, out of hopeless sight,
       Saviours, armed and girt upon with strength of heart, fare forth,
     Sire and daughter, hand on oar and face against the night,
       Maid and man whose names are beacons ever to the North.
     Nearer now; but all the madness of the storming surf
       Hounds and roars them back; but roars and hounds them back in
           vain:
     As a pleasure-skiff may graze the lake-embanking turf,
       So the boat that bears them grates the rock where-toward they
           strain.
     Dawn as fierce and haggard as the face of night scarce guides
       Toward the cries that rent and clove the darkness, crying for
           aid,
     Hours on hours, across the engorged reluctance of the tides,
       Sire and daughter, high-souled man and mightier-hearted maid.
     Not the bravest land that ever breasted war's grim sea,
       Hurled her foes back harried on the lowlands whence they came,
     Held her own and smote her smiters down, while such durst be,
       Shining northward, shining southward, as the aurorean flame,
     Not our mother, not Northumberland, brought ever forth,
       Though no southern shore may match the sons that kiss her mouth,
     Children worthier all the birthright given of the ardent north
       Where the fire of hearts outburns the suns that fire the south.
     Even such fire was this that lit them, not from lowering skies
       Where the darkling dawn flagged, stricken in the sun's own
           shrine,
     Down the gulf of storm subsiding, till their earnest eyes
       Find the relics of the ravening night that spared but nine.
     Life by life the man redeems them, head by storm-worn head,
       While the girl's hand stays the boat whereof the waves are fain:
     Ah, but woe for one, the mother clasping fast her dead!
       Happier, had the surges slain her with her children slain.
     Back they bear, and bring between them safe the woful nine,
       Where above the ravenous Hawkers fixed at watch for prey
     Storm and calm behold the Longstone's towering signal shine
       Now as when that labouring night brought forth a shuddering day.
     Now as then, though like the hounds of storm against her snarling
       All the clamorous years between us storm down many a fame,
     As our sires beheld before us we behold Grace Darling
       Crowned and throned our queen, and as they hailed we hail her
           name.
     Nay, not ours alone, her kinsfolk born, though chiefliest ours,
       East and west and south acclaim her queen of England's maids,
     Star more sweet than all their stars and flower than all their
           flowers,
       Higher in heaven and earth than star that sets or flower that
           fades.
     How should land or sea that nurtured her forget, or love
       Hold not fast her fame for us while aught is borne in mind?
     Land and sea beneath us, sun and moon and stars above,
       Bear the bright soul witness, seen of all but souls born blind.
     Stars and moon and sun may wax and wane, subside and rise,
       Age on age as flake on flake of showering snows be shed:
     Not till earth be sunless, not till death strike blind the skies,
       May the deathless love that waits on deathless deeds be dead.

     Years on years have withered since beside the hearth once thine
       I, too young to have seen thee, touched thy father's hallowed
           hand:
     Thee and him shall all men see for ever, stars that shine
       While the sea that spared thee girds and glorifies the land.




     LOCH TORRIDON

     TO E. H.


     The dawn of night more fair than morning rose,
     Stars hurrying forth on stars, as snows on snows
     Haste when the wind and winter bid them speed.
     Vague miles of moorland road behind us lay
     Scarce traversed ere the day
     Sank, and the sun forsook us at our need,
     Belated. Where we thought to have rested, rest
     Was none; for soft Maree's dim quivering breast,
     Bound round with gracious inland girth of green
     And fearless of the wild wave-wandering West,
     Shone shelterless for strangers; and unseen
     The goal before us lay
     Of all our blithe and strange and strenuous day.

     For when the northering road faced westward--when
     The dark sharp sudden gorge dropped seaward--then,
     Beneath the stars, between the steeps, the track
     We followed, lighted not of moon or sun,
     And plunging whither none
     Might guess, while heaven and earth were hoar and black,
     Seemed even the dim still pass whence none turns back:
     And through the twilight leftward of the way,
     And down the dark, with many a laugh and leap,
     The light blithe hill-streams shone from scaur to steep
     In glittering pride of play;
     And ever while the night grew great and deep
     We felt but saw not what the hills would keep
     Sacred awhile from sense of moon or star;
     And full and far
     Beneath us, sweet and strange as heaven may be,
     The sea.

     The very sea: no mountain-moulded lake
     Whose fluctuant shapeliness is fain to take
     Shape from the steadfast shore that rules it round,
     And only from the storms a casual sound:
     The sea, that harbours in her heart sublime
     The supreme heart of music deep as time,
     And in her spirit strong
     The spirit of all imaginable song.

     Not a whisper or lisp from the waters: the skies were not silenter.
           Peace
     Was between them; a passionless rapture of respite as soft as
           release.
     Not a sound, but a sense that possessed and pervaded with patient
           delight
     The soul and the body, clothed round with the comfort of limitless
           night.
     Night infinite, living, adorable, loved of the land and the sea:
     Night, mother of mercies, who saith to the spirits in prison, Be
           free.
     And softer than dewfall, and kindlier than starlight, and keener
           than wine,
     Came round us the fragrance of waters, the life of the breath of
           the brine.
     We saw not, we heard not, the face or the voice of the waters: we
           knew
     By the darkling delight of the wind as the sense of the sea in it
           grew,
     By the pulse of the darkness about us enkindled and quickened, that
           here,
     Unseen and unheard of us, surely the goal we had faith in was near.
     A silence diviner than music, a darkness diviner than light,
     Fulfilled as from heaven with a measureless comfort the measure of
           night.

     But never a roof for shelter
       And never a sign for guide
         Rose doubtful or visible: only
           And hardly and gladly we heard
     The soft waves whisper and welter,
       Subdued, and allured to subside,
         By the mild night's magic: the lonely
           Sweet silence was soothed, not stirred,
     By the noiseless noise of the gleaming
       Glad ripples, that played and sighed,
         Kissed, laughed, recoiled, and relented,
           Whispered, flickered, and fled.
     No season was this for dreaming
       How oft, with a stormier tide,
         Had the wrath of the winds been vented
           On sons of the tribes long dead:
     The tribes whom time, and the changes
       Of things, and the stress of doom,
         Have erased and effaced; forgotten
           As wrecks or weeds of the shore
     In sight of the stern hill-ranges
       That hardly may change their gloom
         When the fruits of the years wax rotten
           And the seed of them springs no more.
     For the dim strait footway dividing
       The waters that breathed below
         Led safe to the kindliest of shelters
           That ever awoke into light:
     And still in remembrance abiding
       Broods over the stars that glow
         And the water that eddies and welters
           The passionate peace of the night.

     All night long, in the world of sleep,
     Skies and waters were soft and deep:
     Shadow clothed them, and silence made
     Soundless music of dream and shade:
     All above us, the livelong night,
     Shadow, kindled with sense of light;
     All around us, the brief night long,
     Silence, laden with sense of song.
     Stars and mountains without, we knew,
     Watched and waited, the soft night through:
     All unseen, but divined and dear,
     Thrilled the touch of the sea's breath near:
     All unheard, but alive like sound,
     Throbbed the sense of the sea's life round:
     Round us, near us, in depth and height,
     Soft as darkness and keen as light.

     And the dawn leapt in at my casement: and there, as I rose, at my
           feet
     No waves of the landlocked waters, no lake submissive and sweet,
     Soft slave of the lordly seasons, whose breath may loose it or
           freeze;
     But to left and to right and ahead was the ripple whose pulse is
           the sea's.
     From the gorge we had travelled by starlight the sunrise, winged
           and aflame,
     Shone large on the live wide wavelets that shuddered with joy as it
           came;
     As it came and caressed and possessed them, till panting and
           laughing with light
     From mountain to mountain the water was kindled and stung to
           delight.
     And the grey gaunt heights that embraced and constrained and
           compelled it were glad,
     And the rampart of rock, stark naked, that thwarted and barred it,
           was clad
     With a stern grey splendour of sunrise: and scarce had I sprung to
           the sea
     When the dawn and the water were wedded, the hills and the sky set
           free.
     The chain of the night was broken: the waves that embraced me and
           smiled
     And flickered and fawned in the sunlight, alive, unafraid,
           undefiled,
     Were sweeter to swim in than air, though fulfilled with the
           mounting morn,
     Could be for the birds whose triumph rejoiced that a day was born.

     And a day was arisen indeed for us. Years and the changes of years
     Clothed round with their joys and their sorrows, and dead as their
           hopes and their fears,
     Lie noteless and nameless, unlit by remembrance or record of days
     Worth wonder or memory, or cursing or blessing, or passion or
           praise,
     Between us who live and forget not, but yearn with delight in it
           yet,
     And the day we forget not, and never may live and may think to
           forget.
     And the years that were kindlier and fairer, and kindled with
           pleasures as keen,
     Have eclipsed not with lights or with shadows the light on the face
           of it seen.
     For softly and surely, as nearer the boat that we gazed from drew,
     The face of the precipice opened and bade us as birds pass through,
     And the bark shot sheer to the sea through the strait of the sharp
           steep cleft,
     The portal that opens with imminent rampires to right and to left,
     Sublime as the sky they darken and strange as a spell-struck dream,
     On the world unconfined of the mountains, the reign of the sea
           supreme,
     The kingdom of westward waters, wherein when we swam we knew
     The waves that we clove were boundless, the wind on our brows that
           blew
     Had swept no land and no lake, and had warred not on tower or on
           tree,
     But came on us hard out of heaven, and alive with the soul of the
           sea.




     THE PALACE OF PAN

     INSCRIBED TO MY MOTHER


     September, all glorious with gold, as a king
       In the radiance of triumph attired,
     Outlightening the summer, outsweetening the spring,
     Broods wide on the woodlands with limitless wing,
       A presence of all men desired.

     Far eastward and westward the sun-coloured lands
       Smile warm as the light on them smiles;
     And statelier than temples upbuilded with hands,
     Tall column by column, the sanctuary stands
       Of the pine-forest's infinite aisles.

     Mute worship, too fervent for praise or for prayer,
       Possesses the spirit with peace,
     Fulfilled with the breath of the luminous air,
     The fragrance, the silence, the shadows as fair
       As the rays that recede or increase.

     Ridged pillars that redden aloft and aloof,
       With never a branch for a nest,
     Sustain the sublime indivisible roof,
     To the storm and the sun in his majesty proof,
       And awful as waters at rest.

     Man's hand hath not measured the height of them; thought
       May measure not, awe may not know;
     In its shadow the woofs of the woodland are wrought;
     As a bird is the sun in the toils of them caught,
       And the flakes of it scattered as snow.

     As the shreds of a plumage of gold on the ground
       The sun-flakes by multitudes lie,
     Shed loose as the petals of roses discrowned
     On the floors of the forest engilt and embrowned
       And reddened afar and anigh.

     Dim centuries with darkling inscrutable hands
       Have reared and secluded the shrine
     For gods that we know not, and kindled as brands
     On the altar the years that are dust, and their sands
       Time's glass has forgotten for sign.

     A temple whose transepts are measured by miles,
       Whose chancel has morning for priest,
     Whose floor-work the foot of no spoiler defiles,
     Whose musical silence no music beguiles,
       No festivals limit its feast.

     The noon's ministration, the night's and the dawn's,
       Conceals not, reveals not for man,
     On the slopes of the herbless and blossomless lawns,
     Some track of a nymph's or some trail of a faun's
       To the place of the slumber of Pan.

     Thought, kindled and quickened by worship and wonder
       To rapture too sacred for fear
     On the ways that unite or divide them in sunder,
     Alone may discern if about them or under
       Be token or trace of him here.

     With passionate awe that is deeper than panic
       The spirit subdued and unshaken
     Takes heed of the godhead terrene and Titanic
     Whose footfall is felt on the breach of volcanic
       Sharp steeps that their fire has forsaken.

     By a spell more serene than the dim necromantic
       Dead charms of the past and the night,
     Or the terror that lurked in the noon to make frantic
     Where Etna takes shape from the limbs of gigantic
       Dead gods disanointed of might,

     The spirit made one with the spirit whose breath
       Makes noon in the woodland sublime
     Abides as entranced in a presence that saith
     Things loftier than life and serener than death,
       Triumphant and silent as time.

     PINE RIDGE: _September 1893_




     A YEAR'S CAROLS


     JANUARY

     Hail, January, that bearest here
     On snowbright breasts the babe-faced year
       That weeps and trembles to be born.
     Hail, maid and mother, strong and bright,
     Hooded and cloaked and shod with white,
       Whose eyes are stars that match the morn.
     Thy forehead braves the storm's bent bow,
     Thy feet enkindle stars of snow.


     FEBRUARY

     Wan February with weeping cheer,
     Whose cold hand guides the youngling year
       Down misty roads of mire and rime,
     Before thy pale and fitful face
     The shrill wind shifts the clouds apace
       Through skies the morning scarce may climb.
     Thine eyes are thick with heavy tears,
     But lit with hopes that light the year's.


     MARCH

     Hail, happy March, whose foot on earth
     Rings as the blast of martial mirth
       When trumpets fire men's hearts for fray.
     No race of wild things winged or finned
     May match the might that wings thy wind
       Through air and sea, through scud and spray.
     Strong joy and thou were powers twin-born
     Of tempest and the towering morn.


     APRIL

     Crowned April, king whose kiss bade earth
     Bring forth to time her lordliest birth
       When Shakespeare from thy lips drew breath
     And laughed to hold in one soft hand
     A spell that bade the world's wheel stand,
       And power on life, and power on death,
     With quiring suns and sunbright showers
     Praise him, the flower of all thy flowers.


     MAY

     Hail, May, whose bark puts forth full-sailed
     For summer; May, whom Chaucer hailed
       With all his happy might of heart,
     And gave thy rosebright daisy-tips
     Strange fragrance from his amorous lips
       That still thine own breath seems to part
     And sweeten till each word they say
     Is even a flower of flowering May.


     JUNE

     Strong June, superb, serene, elate
     With conscience of thy sovereign state
       Untouched of thunder, though the storm
     Scathe here and there thy shuddering skies
     And bid its lightning cross thine eyes
       With fire, thy golden hours inform
     Earth and the souls of men with life
     That brings forth peace from shining strife.


     JULY

     Hail, proud July, whose fervent mouth
     Bids even be morn and north be south
       By grace and gospel of thy word,
     Whence all the splendour of the sea
     Lies breathless with delight in thee
       And marvel at the music heard
     From the ardent silent lips of noon
     And midnight's rapturous plenilune.


     AUGUST

     Great August, lord of golden lands,
     Whose lordly joy through seas and strands
       And all the red-ripe heart of earth
     Strikes passion deep as life, and stills
     The folded vales and folding hills
       With gladness too divine for mirth,
     The gracious glories of thine eyes
     Make night a noon where darkness dies.


     SEPTEMBER

     Hail, kind September, friend whose grace
     Renews the bland year's bounteous face
       With largess given of corn and wine
     Through many a land that laughs with love
     Of thee and all the heaven above,
       More fruitful found than all save thine
     Whose skies fulfil with strenuous cheer
     The fervent fields that knew thee near.


     OCTOBER

     October of the tawny crown,
     Whose heavy-laden hands drop down
       Blessing, the bounties of thy breath
     And mildness of thy mellowing might
     Fill earth and heaven with love and light
       Too sweet for fear to dream of death
     Or memory, while thy joy lives yet,
     To know what joy would fain forget.


     NOVEMBER

     Hail, soft November, though thy pale
     Sad smile rebuke the words that hail
       Thy sorrow with no sorrowing words
     Or gratulate thy grief with song
     Less bitter than the winds that wrong
       Thy withering woodlands, where the birds
     Keep hardly heart to sing or see
     How fair thy faint wan face may be.


     DECEMBER

     December, thou whose hallowing hands
     On shuddering seas and hardening lands
       Set as a sacramental sign
     The seal of Christmas felt on earth
     As witness toward a new year's birth
       Whose promise makes thy death divine,
     The crowning joy that comes of thee
     Makes glad all grief on land or sea.




     ENGLAND: AN ODE


     I

     Sea and strand, and a lordlier land than sea-tides rolling and
           rising sun
     Clasp and lighten in climes that brighten with day when day that
           was here is done,
     Call aloud on their children, proud with trust that future and past
           are one.

     Far and near from the swan's nest here the storm-birds bred of her
           fair white breast,
     Sons whose home was the sea-wave's foam, have borne the fame of her
           east and west;
     North and south has the storm-wind's mouth rung praise of England
           and England's quest.

     Fame, wherever her flag flew, never forbore to fly with an equal
           wing:
     France and Spain with their warrior train bowed down before her as
           thrall to king;
     India knelt at her feet, and felt her sway more fruitful of life
           than spring.

     Darkness round them as iron bound fell off from races of elder
           name,
     Slain at sight of her eyes, whose light bids freedom lighten and
           burn as flame;
     Night endures not the touch that cures of kingship tyrants, and
           slaves of shame.

     All the terror of time, where error and fear were lords of a world
           of slaves,
     Age on age in resurgent rage and anguish darkening as waves on
           waves,
     Fell or fled from a face that shed such grace as quickens the dust
           of graves.

     Things of night at her glance took flight: the strengths of
           darkness recoiled and sank:
     Sank the fires of the murderous pyres whereon wild agony writhed
           and shrank:
     Rose the light of the reign of right from gulfs of years that the
           darkness drank.

     Yet the might of her wings in flight, whence glory lightens and
           music rings,
     Loud and bright as the dawn's, shall smite and still the discord of
           evil things,
     Yet not slain by her radiant reign, but darkened now by her
           sail-stretched wings.


     II

     Music made of change and conquest, glory born of evil slain,
     Stilled the discord, slew the darkness, bade the lights of tempest
           wane,
     Where the deathless dawn of England rose in sign that right should
           reign.

     Mercy, where the tiger wallowed mad and blind with blood and lust,
     Justice, where the jackal yelped and fed, and slaves allowed it
           just,
     Rose as England's light on Asia rose, and smote them down to dust.

     Justice bright as mercy, mercy girt by justice with her sword,
     Smote and saved and raised and ruined, till the tyrant-ridden horde
     Saw the lightning fade from heaven and knew the sun for God and
           lord.

     Where the footfall sounds of England, where the smile of England
           shines,
     Rings the tread and laughs the face of freedom, fair as hope
           divines
     Days to be, more brave than ours and lit by lordlier stars for
           signs.

     All our past acclaims our future: Shakespeare's voice and Nelson's
           hand,
     Milton's faith and Wordsworth's trust in this our chosen and
           chainless land,
     Bear us witness: come the world against her, England yet shall
           stand.

     Earth and sea bear England witness if he lied who said it; he
     Whom the winds that ward her, waves that clasp, and herb and flower
           and tree
     Fed with English dews and sunbeams, hail as more than man may be.

     No man ever spake as he that bade our England be but true,
     Keep but faith with England fast and firm, and none should bid her
           rue;
     None may speak as he: but all may know the sign that Shakespeare
           knew.


     III

     From the springs of the dawn, from the depths of the noon, from the
           heights of the night that shine,
     Hope, faith, and remembrance of glory that found but in England her
           throne and her shrine,
     Speak louder than song may proclaim them, that here is the seal of
           them set for a sign.

     And loud as the sea's voice thunders applause of the land that is
           one with the sea
     Speaks Time in the ear of the people that never at heart was not
           inly free
     The word of command that assures us of life, if we will but that
           life shall be;

     If the race that is first of the races of men who behold unashamed
           the sun
     Stand fast and forget not the sign that is given of the years and
           the wars that are done,
     The token that all who are born of its blood should in heart as in
           blood be one.

     The word of remembrance that lightens as fire from the steeps of
           the storm-lit past
     Bids only the faith of our fathers endure in us, firm as they held
           it fast:
     That the glory which was from the first upon England alone may
           endure to the last.

     That the love and the hate may change not, the faith may not fade,
           nor the wrath nor scorn,
     That shines for her sons and that burns for her foemen as fire of
           the night or the morn:
     That the births of her womb may forget not the sign of the glory
           wherein they were born.

     A light that is more than the sunlight, an air that is brighter
           than morning's breath,
     Clothes England about as the strong sea clasps her, and answers the
           word that it saith;
     The word that assures her of life if she change not, and choose not
           the ways of death.

     Change darkens and lightens around her, alternate in hope and in
           fear to be:
     Hope knows not if fear speak truth, nor fear whether hope be not
           blind as she:
     But the sun is in heaven that beholds her immortal, and girdled
           with life by the sea.




     ETON: AN ODE

     FOR THE FOUR HUNDRED AND FIFTIETH ANNIVERSARY OF THE FOUNDATION
     OF THE COLLEGE


     I

     Four hundred summers and fifty have shone on the meadows of Thames
           and died
     Since Eton arose in an age that was darkness, and shone by his
           radiant side
     As a star that the spell of a wise man's word bade live and ascend
           and abide.

     And ever as time's flow brightened, a river more dark than the
           storm-clothed sea,
     And age upon age rose fairer and larger in promise of hope set
           free,
     With England Eton her child kept pace as a fostress of men to be.

     And ever as earth waxed wiser, and softer the beating of time's
           wide wings,
     Since fate fell dark on her father, most hapless and gentlest of
           star-crossed kings,
     Her praise has increased as the chant of the dawn that the choir of
           the noon outsings.


     II

     Storm and cloud in the skies were loud, and lightning mocked at the
           blind sun's light;
     War and woe on the land below shed heavier shadow than falls from
           night;
     Dark was earth at her dawn of birth as here her record of praise is
           bright.

     Clear and fair through her morning air the light first laugh of the
           sunlit stage
     Rose and rang as a fount that sprang from depths yet dark with a
           spent storm's rage,
     Loud and glad as a boy's, and bade the sunrise open on
           Shakespeare's age.

     Lords of state and of war, whom fate found strong in battle, in
           counsel strong,
     Here, ere fate had approved them great, abode their season, and
           thought not long:
     Here too first was the lark's note nursed that filled and flooded
           the skies with song.


     III

     Shelley, lyric lord of England's lordliest singers, here first
           heard
     Ring from lips of poets crowned and dead the Promethean word
     Whence his soul took fire, and power to outsoar the sunward-soaring
           bird.

     Still the reaches of the river, still the light on field and hill,
     Still the memories held aloft as lamps for hope's young fire to
           fill,
     Shine, and while the light of England lives shall shine for England
           still.

     When four hundred more and fifty years have risen and shone and
           set,
     Bright with names that men remember, loud with names that men
           forget,
     Haply here shall Eton's record be what England finds it yet.




     THE UNION


     I

     Three in one, but one in three,
     God, who girt her with the sea,
     Bade our Commonweal to be:
           Nought, if now not one.
     Though fraud and fear would sever
     The bond assured for ever,
     Their shameful strength shall never
         Undo what heaven has done.


     II

     South and North and West and East
     Watch the ravens flock to feast,
     Dense as round some death-struck beast,
           Black as night is black.
     Stand fast as faith together
     In stress of treacherous weather
     When hounds and wolves break tether
         And Treason guides the pack.


     III

     Lovelier than thy seas are strong,
     Glorious Ireland, sword and song
     Gird and crown thee: none may wrong,
           Save thy sons alone.
     The sea that laughs around us
     Hath sundered not but bound us:
     The sun's first rising found us
         Throned on its equal throne.


     IV

     North and South and East and West,
     All true hearts that wish thee best
     Beat one tune and own one quest,
           Staunch and sure as steel.
     God guard from dark disunion
     Our threefold State's communion,
     God save the loyal Union,
         The royal Commonweal!




     EAST TO WEST


       Sunset smiles on sunrise: east and west are one,
       Face to face in heaven before the sovereign sun.
     From the springs of the dawn everlasting a glory renews and
           transfigures the west,
     From the depths of the sunset a light as of morning enkindles the
           broad sea's breast,
     And the lands and the skies and the waters are glad of the day's
           and the night's work done.

       Child of dawn, and regent on the world-wide sea,
       England smiles on Europe, fair as dawn and free.
     Not the waters that gird her are purer, nor mightier the winds that
           her waters know.
     But America, daughter and sister of England, is praised of them,
           far as they flow:
     Atlantic responds to Pacific the praise of her days that have been
           and shall be.

       So from England westward let the watchword fly,
       So for England eastward let the seas reply;
     Praise, honour, and love everlasting be sent on the wind's wings,
           westward and east,
     That the pride of the past and the pride of the future may mingle
           as friends at feast,
     And the sons of the lords of the world-wide seas be one till the
           world's life die.




     INSCRIPTIONS

     FOR THE FOUR SIDES OF A PEDESTAL


     I

     Marlowe, the father of the sons of song
       Whose praise is England's crowning praise, above
     All glories else that crown her, sweet and strong
       As England, clothed with light and fire of love,
     And girt with might of passion, thought, and trust,
     Stands here in spirit, sleeps not here in dust.


     II

     Marlowe, a star too sovereign, too superb,
       To fade when heaven took fire from Shakespeare's light,
     A soul that knew but song's triumphal curb
       And love's triumphant bondage, holds of right
     His pride of place, who first in place and time
     Made England's voice as England's heart sublime.


     III

     Marlowe bade England live in living song:
       The light he lifted up lit Shakespeare's way:
     He spake, and life sprang forth in music, strong
       As fire or lightning, sweet as dawn of day.
     Song was a dream where day took night to wife:
     "Let there be life," he said: and there was life.


     IV

     Marlowe of all our fathers first beheld
       Beyond the tidal ebb and flow of things
     The tideless depth and height of souls, impelled
       By thought or passion, borne on waves or wings,
     Beyond all flight or sight but song's: and he
     First gave our song a sound that matched our sea.




     ON THE DEATH OF RICHARD BURTON


     Night or light is it now, wherein
     Sleeps, shut out from the wild world's din,
         Wakes, alive with a life more clear,
     One who found not on earth his kin?

     Sleep were sweet for awhile, were dear
     Surely to souls that were heartless here,
         Souls that faltered and flagged and fell,
     Soft of spirit and faint of cheer.

     A living soul that had strength to quell
     Hope the spectre and fear the spell,
         Clear-eyed, content with a scorn sublime
     And a faith superb, can it fare not well?

     Life, the shadow of wide-winged time,
     Cast from the wings that change as they climb,
         Life may vanish in death, and seem
     Less than the promise of last year's prime.

     But not for us is the past a dream
     Wherefrom, as light from a clouded stream,
         Faith fades and shivers and ebbs away,
     Faint as the moon if the sundawn gleam.

     Faith, whose eyes in the low last ray
     Watch the fire that renews the day,
         Faith which lives in the living past,
     Rock-rooted, swerves not as weeds that sway.

     As trees that stand in the storm-wind fast
     She stands, unsmitten of death's keen blast,
         With strong remembrance of sunbright spring
     Alive at heart to the lifeless last.

     Night, she knows, may in no wise cling
     To a soul that sinks not and droops not wing,
         A sun that sets not in death's false night
     Whose kingdom finds him not thrall but king.

     Souls there are that for soul's affright
     Bow down and cower in the sun's glad sight,
         Clothed round with faith that is one with fear,
     And dark with doubt of the live world's light.

     But him we hailed from afar or near
     As boldest born of the bravest here
         And loved as brightest of souls that eyed
     Life, time, and death with unchangeful cheer,

     A wider soul than the world was wide,
     Whose praise made love of him one with pride,
         What part has death or has time in him,
     Who rode life's lists as a god might ride?

     While England sees not her old praise dim,
     While still her stars through the world's night swim,
         A fame outshining her Raleigh's fame,
     A light that lightens her loud sea's rim,

     Shall shine and sound as her sons proclaim
     The pride that kindles at Burton's name.
         And joy shall exalt their pride to be
     The same in birth if in soul the same.

     But we that yearn for a friend's face--we
     Who lack the light that on earth was he--
         Mourn, though the light be a quenchless flame
     That shines as dawn on a tideless sea.




     ELEGY

     1869-1891


     Auvergne, Auvergne, O wild and woful land,
       O glorious land and gracious, white as gleam
     The stairs of heaven, black as a flameless brand,
       Strange even as life, and stranger than a dream,

     Could earth remember man, whose eyes made bright
       The splendour of her beauty, lit by day
     Or soothed and softened and redeemed by night,
       Wouldst thou not know what light has passed away?

     Wouldst thou not know whom England, whom the world,
       Mourns? For the world whose wildest ways he trod,
     And smiled their dangers down that coiled and curled
       Against him, knows him now less man than god.

     Our demigod of daring, keenest-eyed
       To read and deepest read in earth's dim things,
     A spirit now whose body of death has died
       And left it mightier yet in eyes and wings,
     The sovereign seeker of the world, who now
       Hath sought what world the light of death may show,
     Hailed once with me the crowns that load thy brow,
       Crags dark as midnight, columns bright as snow.

     Thy steep small Siena, splendid and content
       As shines the mightier city's Tuscan pride
     Which here its face reflects in radiance, pent
       By narrower bounds from towering side to side,

     Set fast between the ridged and foamless waves
       Of earth more fierce and fluctuant than the sea,
     The fearless town of towers that hails and braves
       The heights that gird, the sun that brands Le Puy;

     The huddled churches clinging on the cliffs
       As birds alighting might for storm's sake cling,
     Moored to the rocks as tempest-harried skiffs
       To perilous refuge from the loud wind's wing;

     The stairs on stairs that wind and change and climb
       Even up to the utmost crag's edge curved and curled,
     More bright than vision, more than faith sublime,
       Strange as the light and darkness of the world;

     Strange as are night and morning, stars and sun,
       And washed from west and east by day's deep tide.
     Shine yet less fair, when all their heights are won,
       Than sundawn shows thy pillared mountain-side.

     Even so the dawn of death, whose light makes dim
       The starry fires that life sees rise and set,
     Shows higher than here he shone before us him
       Whom faith forgets not, nor shall fame forget.

     Even so those else unfooted heights we clomb
       Through scudding mist and eddying whirls of cloud,
     Blind as a pilot beaten blind with foam,
       And shrouded as a corpse with storm's grey shroud,

     Foot following foot along the sheer strait ledge
       Where space was none to bear the wild goat's feet
     Till blind we sat on the outer footless edge
       Where darkling death seemed fain to share the seat,

     The abyss before us, viewless even as time's,
       The abyss to left of us, the abyss to right,
     Bid thought now dream how high the freed soul climbs
       That death sets free from change of day and night.

     The might of raging mist and wind whose wrath
       Shut from our eyes the narrowing rock we trod,
     The wondrous world it darkened, made our path
       Like theirs who take the shadow of death for God.

     Yet eastward, veiled in vapour white as snow,
       The grim black herbless heights that scorn the sun
     And mock the face of morning rose to show
       The work of earth-born fire and earthquake done.

     And half the world was haggard night, wherein
       We strove our blind way through: but far above
     Was light that watched the wild mists whirl and spin,
       And far beneath a land worth light and love.

     Deep down the Valley of the Curse, undaunted
       By shadow and whisper of winds with sins for wings
     And ghosts of crime wherethrough the heights live haunted
       By present sense of past and monstrous things,

     The glimmering water holds its gracious way
       Full forth, and keeps one happier hand's-breadth green
     Of all that storm-scathed world whereon the sway
       Sits dark as death of deadlier things unseen.

     But on the soundless and the viewless river
       That bears through night perchance again to day
     The dead whom death and twin-born fame deliver
       From life that dies, and time's inveterate sway,

     No shadow save of falsehood and of fear
       That brands the future with the past, and bids
     The spirit wither and the soul grow sere,
       Hovers or hangs to cloud life's opening lids,

     If life have eyes to lift again and see,
       Beyond the bounds of sensual sight or breath,
     What life incognisable of ours may be
       That turns our light to darkness deep as death.

     Priests and the soulless serfs of priests may swarm
       With vulturous acclamation, loud in lies,
     About his dust while yet his dust is warm
       Who mocked as sunlight mocks their base blind eyes,

     Their godless ghost of godhead, false and foul
       As fear his dam or hell his throne: but we,
     Scarce hearing, heed no carrion church-wolf's howl:
       The corpse be theirs to mock; the soul is free.

     Free as ere yet its earthly day was done
       It lived above the coil about us curled:
     A soul whose eyes were keener than the sun,
       A soul whose wings were wider than the world.

     We, sons of east and west, ringed round with dreams,
       Bound fast with visions, girt about with fears,
     Live, trust, and think by chance, while shadow seems
       Light, and the wind that wrecks a hand that steers.

     He, whose full soul held east and west in poise,
       Weighed man with man, and creed of man's with creed,
     And age with age, their triumphs and their toys,
       And found what faith may read not and may read.

     Scorn deep and strong as death and life, that lit
       With fire the smile at lies and dreams outworn
     Wherewith he smote them, showed sublime in it
       The splendour and the steadfastness of scorn.

     What loftier heaven, what lordlier air, what space
       Illimitable, insuperable, infinite,
     Now to that strong-winged soul yields ampler place
       Than passing darkness yields to passing light,

     No dream, no faith can tell us: hope and fear,
       Whose tongues were loud of old as children's, now
     From babbling fall to silence: change is here,
       And death; dark furrows drawn by time's dark plough.

     Still sunward here on earth its flight was bent,
       Even since the man within the child began
     To yearn and kindle with superb intent
       And trust in time to magnify the man.

     Still toward the old garden of the Sun, whose fruit
       The honey-heavy lips of Sophocles
     Desired and sang, wherein the unwithering root
       Sprang of all growths that thought brings forth and sees

     Incarnate, bright with bloom or dense with leaf
       Far-shadowing, deep as depth of dawn or night:
     And all were parcel of the garnered sheaf
       His strenuous spirit bound and stored aright.

     And eastward now, and ever toward the dawn,
       If death's deep veil by life's bright hand be rent,
     We see, as through the shadow of death withdrawn,
       The imperious soul's indomitable ascent.

     But not the soul whose labour knew not end--
       But not the swordsman's hand, the crested head--
     The royal heart we mourn, the faultless friend,
       Burton--a name that lives till fame be dead.




     A SEQUENCE OF SONNETS ON THE DEATH OF ROBERT BROWNING


     I

     The clearest eyes in all the world they read
       With sense more keen and spirit of sight more true
       Than burns and thrills in sunrise, when the dew
     Flames, and absorbs the glory round it shed,
     As they the light of ages quick and dead,
       Closed now, forsake us: yet the shaft that slew
       Can slay not one of all the works we knew,
     Nor death discrown that many-laurelled head.

     The works of words whose life seems lightning wrought,
     And moulded of unconquerable thought,
       And quickened with imperishable flame,
     Stand fast and shine and smile, assured that nought
       May fade of all their myriad-moulded fame,
       Nor England's memory clasp not Browning's name.

     _December 13, 1889._


     II

     Death, what hast thou to do with one for whom
       Time is not lord, but servant? What least part
       Of all the fire that fed his living heart,
     Of all the light more keen than sundawn's bloom
     That lit and led his spirit, strong as doom
       And bright as hope, can aught thy breath may dart
       Quench? Nay, thou knowest he knew thee what thou art,
     A shadow born of terror's barren womb,
     That brings not forth save shadows. What art thou,
     To dream, albeit thou breathe upon his brow,
       That power on him is given thee,--that thy breath
     Can make him less than love acclaims him now,
       And hears all time sound back the word it saith?
       What part hast thou then in his glory, Death?


     III

     A graceless doom it seems that bids us grieve:
       Venice and winter, hand in deadly hand,
       Have slain the lover of her sunbright strand
     And singer of a stormbright Christmas Eve.
     A graceless guerdon we that loved receive
       For all our love, from that the dearest land
       Love worshipped ever. Blithe and soft and bland,
     Too fair for storm to scathe or fire to cleave,
     Shone on our dreams and memories evermore
     The domes, the towers, the mountains and the shore
       That gird or guard thee, Venice: cold and black
     Seems now the face we loved as he of yore.
       We have given thee love--no stint, no stay, no lack:
       What gift, what gift is this thou hast given us back?


     IV

     But he--to him, who knows what gift is thine,
       Death? Hardly may we think or hope, when we
       Pass likewise thither where to-night is he,
     Beyond the irremeable outer seas that shine
     And darken round such dreams as half divine
       Some sunlit harbour in that starless sea
       Where gleams no ship to windward or to lee,
     To read with him the secret of thy shrine.

     There too, as here, may song, delight, and love,
     The nightingale, the sea-bird, and the dove,
       Fulfil with joy the splendour of the sky
     Till all beneath wax bright as all above:
       But none of all that search the heavens, and try
       The sun, may match the sovereign eagle's eye.

     _December 14._


     V

     Among the wondrous ways of men and time
       He went as one that ever found and sought
       And bore in hand the lamplike spirit of thought
     To illume with instance of its fire sublime
     The dusk of many a cloudlike age and clime.
       No spirit in shape of light and darkness wrought,
       No faith, no fear, no dream, no rapture, nought
     That blooms in wisdom, nought that burns in crime,
     No virtue girt and armed and helmed with light,
     No love more lovely than the snows are white,
       No serpent sleeping in some dead soul's tomb,
     No song-bird singing from some live soul's height,
       But he might hear, interpret, or illume
       With sense invasive as the dawn of doom.


     VI

     What secret thing of splendour or of shade
       Surmised in all those wandering ways wherein
       Man, led of love and life and death and sin,
     Strays, climbs, or cowers, allured, absorbed, afraid,
     Might not the strong and sunlike sense invade
       Of that full soul that had for aim to win
       Light, silent over time's dark toil and din,
     Life, at whose touch death fades as dead things fade?
     O spirit of man, what mystery moves in thee
     That he might know not of in spirit, and see
       The heart within the heart that seems to strive,
     The life within the life that seems to be,
       And hear, through all thy storms that whirl and drive,
       The living sound of all men's souls alive?


     VII

     He held no dream worth waking: so he said,
       He who stands now on death's triumphal steep,
       Awakened out of life wherein we sleep
     And dream of what he knows and sees, being dead.
     But never death for him was dark or dread:
       "Look forth" he bade the soul, and fear not. Weep,
       All ye that trust not in his truth, and keep
     Vain memory's vision of a vanished head
     As all that lives of all that once was he
     Save that which lightens from his word: but we,
       Who, seeing the sunset-coloured waters roll,
     Yet know the sun subdued not of the sea,
       Nor weep nor doubt that still the spirit is whole,
       And life and death but shadows of the soul.

     _December 15._




     SUNSET AND MOONRISE

     NEW YEAR'S EVE, 1889


     All the west, whereon the sunset sealed the dead year's glorious
           grave
       Fast with seals of light and fire and cloud that light and fire
           illume,
       Glows at heart and kindles earth and heaven with joyous blush and
           bloom,
     Warm and wide as life, and glad of death that only slays to save.
     As a tide-reconquered sea-rock lies aflush with the influent wave
       Lies the light aflush with darkness, lapped about by lustrous
           gloom,
       Even as life with death, and fame with time, and memory with the
           tomb
     Where a dead man hath for vassals Fame the serf and Time the slave.

     Far from earth as heaven, the steadfast light withdrawn, superb,
           suspense,
       Burns in dumb divine expansion of illimitable flower:
     Moonrise whets the shadow's edges keen as noontide: hence and
           thence
       Glows the presence from us passing, shines and passes not the
           power.
     Souls arise whose word remembered is as spirit within the sense:
       All the hours are theirs of all the seasons: death has but his
           hour.




     BIRTHDAY ODE

     AUGUST 6, 1891


     I

     Love and praise, and a length of days whose shadow cast upon time
           is light,
     Days whose sound was a spell shed round from wheeling wings as of
           doves in flight,
     Meet in one, that the mounting sun to-day may triumph, and cast out
           night.

     Two years more than the full fourscore lay hallowing hands on a
           sacred head--
     Scarce one score of the perfect four uncrowned of fame as they
           smiled and fled:
     Still and soft and alive aloft their sunlight stays though the suns
           be dead.

     Ere we were or were thought on, ere the love that gave us to life
           began,
     Fame grew strong with his crescent song, to greet the goal of the
           race they ran,
     Song with fame, and the lustrous name with years whose changes
           acclaimed the man.


     II

     Soon, ere time in the rounding rhyme of choral seasons had hailed
           us men,
     We too heard and acclaimed the word whose breath was life upon
           England then--
     Life more bright than the breathless light of soundless noon in a
           songless glen.

     Ah, the joy of the heartstruck boy whose ear was opened of love to
           hear!
     Ah, the bliss of the burning kiss of song and spirit, the mounting
           cheer
     Lit with fire of divine desire and love that knew not if love were
           fear!

     Fear and love as of heaven above and earth enkindled of heaven were
           one;
     One white flame, that around his name grew keen and strong as the
           worldwide sun;
     Awe made bright with implied delight, as weft with weft of the
           rainbow spun.


     III

     He that fears not the voice he hears and loves shall never have
           heart to sing:
     All the grace of the sun-god's face that bids the soul as a
           fountain spring
     Bids the brow that receives it bow, and hail his likeness on earth
           as king.

     We that knew when the sun's shaft flew beheld and worshipped,
           adored and heard:
     Light rang round it of shining sound, whence all men's hearts were
           subdued and stirred:
     Joy, love, sorrow, the day, the morrow, took life upon them in one
           man's word.

     Not for him can the years wax dim, nor downward swerve on a
           darkening way:
     Upward wind they, and leave behind such light as lightens the front
           of May:
     Fair as youth and sublime as truth we find the fame that we hail
           to-day.




     THRENODY

     OCTOBER 6, 1892


     I

     Life, sublime and serene when time had power upon it and ruled its
           breath,
     Changed it, bade it be glad or sad, and hear what change in the
           world's ear saith,
     Shines more fair in the starrier air whose glory lightens the dusk
           of death.

     Suns that sink on the wan sea's brink, and moons that kindle and
           flame and fade,
     Leave more clear for the darkness here the stars that set not and
           see not shade
     Rise and rise on the lowlier skies by rule of sunlight and
           moonlight swayed.

     So, when night for his eyes grew bright, his proud head pillowed on
           Shakespeare's breast,
     Hand in hand with him, soon to stand where shine the glories that
           death loves best,
     Passed the light of his face from sight, and sank sublimely to
           radiant rest.


     II

     Far above us and all our love, beyond all reach of its voiceless
           praise,
     Shines for ever the name that never shall feel the shade of the
           changeful days
     Fall and chill the delight that still sees winter's light on it
           shine like May's.

     Strong as death is the dark day's breath whose blast has withered
           the life we see
     Here where light is the child of night, and less than visions or
           dreams are we:
     Strong as death; but a word, a breath, a dream is stronger than
           death can be.

     Strong as truth and superb in youth eternal, fair as the sundawn's
           flame
     Seen when May on her first-born day bids earth exult in her radiant
           name,
     Lives, clothed round with its praise and crowned with love that
           dies not, his love-lit fame.


     III

     Fairer far than the morning star, and sweet for us as the songs
           that rang
     Loud through heaven from the choral Seven when all the stars of the
           morning sang,
     Shines the song that we loved so long--since first such love in us
           flamed and sprang.

     England glows as a sunlit rose from mead to mountain, from sea to
           sea,
     Bright with love and with pride above all taint of sorrow that
           needs must be,
     Needs must live for an hour, and give its rainbow's glory to lawn
           and lea.

     Not through tears shall the new-born years behold him, crowned with
           applause of men,
     Pass at last from a lustrous past to life that lightens beyond
           their ken,
     Glad and dead, and from earthward led to sunward, guided of Imogen.




     THE BALLAD OF MELICERTES

     IN MEMORY OF THEODORE DE BANVILLE


     Death, a light outshining life, bids heaven resume
       Star by star the souls whose light made earth divine.
     Death, a night outshining day, sees burn and bloom
       Flower by flower, and sun by sun, the fames that shine
       Deathless, higher than life beheld their sovereign sign.
     Dead Simonides of Ceos, late restored,
     Given again of God, again by man deplored,
       Shone but yestereve, a glory frail as breath.
     Frail? But fame's breath quickens, kindles, keeps in ward,
       Life so sweet as this that dies and casts off death.

     Mother's love, and rapture of the sea, whose womb
       Breeds eternal life of joy that stings like brine,
     Pride of song, and joy to dare the singer's doom,
       Sorrow soft as sleep and laughter bright as wine,
       Flushed and filled with fragrant fire his lyric line.
     As the sea-shell utters, like a stricken chord,
     Music uttering all the sea's within it stored,
       Poet well-beloved, whose praise our sorrow saith,
     So thy songs retain thy soul, and so record
       Life so sweet as this that dies and casts off death.

     Side by side we mourned at Gautier's golden tomb:
       Here in spirit now I stand and mourn at thine.
     Yet no breath of death strikes thence, no shadow of gloom,
       Only light more bright than gold of the inmost mine,
       Only steam of incense warm from love's own shrine.
     Not the darkling stream, the sundering Stygian ford,
     Not the hour that smites and severs as a sword,
       Not the night subduing light that perisheth,
     Smite, subdue, divide from us by doom abhorred,
       Life so sweet as this that dies and casts off death.

     Prince of song more sweet than honey, lyric lord,
     Not thy France here only mourns a light adored,
       One whose love-lit fame the world inheriteth.
     Strangers too, now brethren, hail with heart's accord
       Life so sweet as this that dies and casts off death.




     AU TOMBEAU DE BANVILLE


     La plus douce des voix qui vibraient sous le ciel
     Se tait: les rossignols ailés pleurent le frère
     Qui s'envole au-dessus de l'âpre et sombre terre,
     Ne lui laissant plus voir que l'être essentiel,

     Esprit qui chante et rit, fleur d'une âme sans fiel.
     L'ombre élyséenne, où la nuit n'est que lumière,
     Revoit, tout revêtu de splendeur douce et fière,
     Mélicerte, poète à la bouche de miel.

     Dieux exilés, passants célestes de ce monde,
     Dont on entend parfois dans notre nuit profonde
     Vibrer la voix, frémir les ailes, vous savez
     S'il vous aima, s'il vous pleura, lui dont la vie
     Et le chant rappelaient les vôtres. Recevez
     L'âme de Mélicerte affranchie et ravie.




     LIGHT: AN EPICEDE

     TO PHILIP BOURKE MARSTON


     Love will not weep because the seal is broken
       That sealed upon a life beloved and brief
     Darkness, and let but song break through for token
       How deep, too far for even thy song's relief,
       Slept in thy soul the secret springs of grief.

     Thy song may soothe full many a soul hereafter,
       As tears, if tears will come, dissolve despair;
     As here but late, with smile more bright than laughter,
       Thy sweet strange yearning eyes would seem to bear
       Witness that joy might cleave the clouds of care.

     Two days agone, and love was one with pity
       When love gave thought wings toward the glimmering goal
     Where, as a shrine lit in some darkling city,
       Shone soft the shrouded image of thy soul:
       And now thou art healed of life; thou art healed, and whole.

     Yea, two days since, all we that loved thee pitied:
       And now with wondering love, with shame of face,
     We think how foolish now, how far unfitted,
       Should be from us, toward thee who hast run thy race,
       Pity--toward thee, who hast won the painless place;

     The painless world of death, yet unbeholden
       Of eyes that dream what light now lightens thine
     And will not weep. Thought, yearning toward those olden
       Dear hours that sorrow sees and sees not shine,
       Bows tearless down before a flameless shrine:

     A flameless altar here of life and sorrow
       Quenched and consumed together. These were one,
     One thing for thee, as night was one with morrow
       And utter darkness with the sovereign sun:
       And now thou seest life, sorrow, and darkness done.

     And yet love yearns again to win thee hither;
       Blind love, and loveless, and unworthy thee:
     Here where I watch the hours of darkness wither,
       Here where mine eyes were glad and sad to see
       Thine that could see not mine, though turned on me.

     But now, if aught beyond sweet sleep lie hidden,
       And sleep be sealed not fast on dead men's sight
     For ever, thine hath grace for ours forbidden,
       And sees us compassed round with change and night:
       Yet light like thine is ours, if love be light.




     THRENODY


     Watching here alone by the fire whereat last year
     Sat with me the friend that a week since yet was near,
       That a week has borne so far and hid so deep,
       Woe am I that I may not weep,
       May not yearn to behold him here.

     Shame were mine, and little the love I bore him were,
     Now to mourn that better he fares than love may fare
       Which desires, and would not have indeed, its will,
       Would not love him so worse than ill,
       Would not clothe him again with care.

     Yet can love not choose but remember, hearts but ache,
     Eyes but darken, only for one vain thought's poor sake,
       For the thought that by this hearth's now lonely side
       Two fast friends, on the day he died,
       Looked once more for his hand to take.

     Let thy soul forgive them, and pardon heal the sin,
     Though their hearts be heavy to think what then had been,
       The delight that never while they live may be--
       Love's communion of speech with thee,
       Soul and speech with the soul therein.

     O my friend, O brother, a glory veiled and marred!
     Never love made moan for a life more evil-starred.
       Was it envy, chance, or chance-compelling fate,
       Whence thy spirit was bruised so late,
       Bowed so heavily, bound so hard?

     Now released, it may be,--if only love might know--
     Filled and fired with sight, it beholds us blind and low
       With a pity keener yet, if that may be,
       Even than ever was this that we
       Felt, when love of thee wrought us woe.

     None may tell the depths and the heights of life and death.
     What we may we give thee: a word that sorrow saith,
       And that none will heed save sorrow: scarce a song.
       All we may, who have loved thee long,
       Take: the best we can give is breath.




     A DIRGE


     A bell tolls on in my heart
       As though in my ears a knell
       Had ceased for awhile to swell,
     But the sense of it would not part
     From the spirit that bears its part
       In the chime of the soundless bell.

     Ah dear dead singer of sorrow,
       The burden is now not thine
       That grief bade sound for a sign
     Through the songs of the night whose morrow
     Has risen, and I may not borrow
       A beam from its radiant shrine.

     The burden has dropped from thee
       That grief on thy life bound fast;
       The winter is over and past
     Whose end thou wast fain to see.
     Shall sorrow not comfort me
       That is thine no longer--at last?

     Good day, good night, and good morrow,
       Men living and mourning say.
       For thee we could only pray
     That night of the day might borrow
     Such comfort as dreams lend sorrow:
       Death gives thee at last good day.




     A REMINISCENCE


     The rose to the wind has yielded: all its leaves
       Lie strewn on the graveyard grass, and all their light
       And colour and fragrance leave our sense and sight
     Bereft as a man whom bitter time bereaves
     Of blossom at once and hope of garnered sheaves,
       Of April at once and August. Day to night
       Calls wailing, and life to death, and depth to height,
     And soul upon soul of man that hears and grieves.

     Who knows, though he see the snow-cold blossom shed,
       If haply the heart that burned within the rose,
     The spirit in sense, the life of life be dead?
       If haply the wind that slays with storming snows
     Be one with the wind that quickens? Bow thine head,
       O Sorrow, and commune with thine heart: who knows?




     VIA DOLOROSA


     The days of a man are threescore years and ten.
       The days of his life were half a man's, whom we
       Lament, and would yet not bid him back, to be
     Partaker of all the woes and ways of men.
     Life sent him enough of sorrow: not again
       Would anguish of love, beholding him set free,
       Bring back the beloved to suffer life and see
     No light but the fire of grief that scathed him then.

     We know not at all: we hope, and do not fear.
     We shall not again behold him, late so near,
       Who now from afar above, with eyes alight
     And spirit enkindled, haply toward us here
       Looks down unforgetful yet of days like night
       And love that has yet his sightless face in sight.

     _February 15, 1887._


     I

     TRANSFIGURATION

     But half a man's days--and his days were nights.
       What hearts were ours who loved him, should we pray
       That night would yield him back to darkling day,
     Sweet death that soothes, to life that spoils and smites?
     For now, perchance, life lovelier than the light's
       That shed no comfort on his weary way
       Shows him what none may dream to see or say
     Ere yet the soul may scale those topless heights
     Where death lies dead, and triumph. Haply there
       Already may his kindling eyesight find
     Faces of friends--no face than his more fair--
       And first among them found of all his kind
     Milton, with crowns from Eden on his hair,
       And eyes that meet a brother's now not blind.


     II

     DELIVERANCE

     O Death, fair Death, sole comforter and sweet,
       Nor Love nor Hope can give such gifts as thine.
       Sleep hardly shows us round thy shadowy shrine
     What roses hang, what music floats, what feet
     Pass and what wings of angels. We repeat
       Wild words or mild, disastrous or divine,
       Blind prayer, blind imprecation, seeing no sign
     Nor hearing aught of thee not faint and fleet
     As words of men or snowflakes on the wind.
     But if we chide thee, saying "Thou hast sinned, thou hast sinned,
     Dark Death, to take so sweet a light away
       As shone but late, though shadowed, in our skies,"
     We hear thine answer--"Night has given what day
       Denied him: darkness hath unsealed his eyes."


     III

     THANKSGIVING

     Could love give strength to thank thee! Love can give
       Strong sorrow heart to suffer: what we bear
       We would not put away, albeit this were
     A burden love might cast aside and live.
     Love chooses rather pain than palliative,
       Sharp thought than soft oblivion. May we dare
       So trample down our passion and our prayer
     That fain would cling round feet now fugitive
     And stay them--so remember, so forget,
     What joy we had who had his presence yet,
     What griefs were his while joy in him was ours
       And grief made weary music of his breath,
     As even to hail his best and last of hours
       With love grown strong enough to thank thee, Death?


     IV

     LIBITINA VERTICORDIA

     Sister of sleep, healer of life, divine
       As rest and strong as very love may be,
       To set the soul that love could set not free,
     To bid the skies that day could bid not shine,
     To give the gift that life withheld was thine.
       With all my heart I loved one borne from me:
       And all my heart bows down and praises thee,
     Death, that hast now made grief not his but mine.

     O Changer of men's hearts, we would not bid thee
       Turn back our hearts from sorrow: this alone
       We bid, we pray thee, from thy sovereign throne
     And sanctuary sublime where heaven has hid thee,
       Give: grace to know of those for whom we weep
       That if they wake their life is sweet as sleep.


     V

     THE ORDER OF RELEASE

     Thou canst not give it. Grace enough is ours
       To know that pain for him has fallen on rest.
       The worst we know was his on earth: the best,
     We fain would think,--a thought no fear deflowers--
     Is his, released from bonds of rayless hours.
       Ah, turn our hearts from longing; bid our quest
       Cease, as content with failure. This thy guest
     Sleeps, vexed no more of time's imperious powers,
     The spirit of hope, the spirit of change and loss,
     The spirit of love bowed down beneath his cross,
       Nor now needs comfort from the strength of song.
     Love, should he wake, bears now no cross for him:
     Dead hope, whose living eyes like his were dim,
       Has brought forth better comfort, strength more strong.


     VI

     PSYCHAGOGOS

     As Greece of old acclaimed thee God and man,
       So, Death, our tongue acclaims thee: yet wast thou
       Hailed of old Rome as Romans hail thee now,
     Goddess and woman. Since the sands first ran
     That told when first man's life and death began,
       The shadows round thy blind ambiguous brow
       Have mocked the votive plea, the pleading vow
     That sought thee sorrowing, fain to bless or ban.

     But stronger than a father's love is thine,
       And gentler than a mother's. Lord and God,
       Thy staff is surer than the wizard rod
     That Hermes bare as priest before thy shrine
       And herald of thy mercies. We could give
       Nought, when we would have given: thou bidst him live.


     VII

     THE LAST WORD

     So many a dream and hope that went and came,
       So many and sweet, that love thought like to be,
       Of hours as bright and soft as those for me
     That made our hearts for song's sweet love the same,
     Lie now struck dead, that hope seems one with shame.
       O Death, thy name is Love: we know it, and see
       The witness: yet for very love's sake we
     Can hardly bear to mix with thine his name.

     Philip, how hard it is to bid thee part
     Thou knowest, if aught thou knowest where now thou art
       Of us that loved and love thee. None may tell
     What none but knows--how hard it is to say
     The word that seals up sorrow, darkens day,
       And bids fare forth the soul it bids farewell.




     IN MEMORY OF AURELIO SAFFI


     The wider world of men that is not ours
       Receives a soul whose life on earth was light.
     Though darkness close the date of human hours,
       Love holds the spirit and sense of life in sight,
       That may not, even though death bid fly, take flight.
     Faith, love, and hope fulfilled with memory, see
     As clear and dear as life could bid it be
     The present soul that is and is not he.

     He, who held up the shield and sword of Rome
       Against the ravening brood of recreant France,
     Beside the man of men whom heaven took home
       When earth beheld the spring's first eyebeams glance
       And life and winter seemed alike a trance
     Eighteen years since, in sight of heaven and spring
     That saw the soul above all souls take wing,
     He too now hears the heaven we hear not sing.

     He too now dwells where death is dead, and stands
       Where souls like stars exult in life to be:
     Whence all who linked heroic hearts and hands
       Shine on our sight, and give it strength to see
       What hope makes fair for all whom faith makes free:
     Free with such freedom as we find in sleep,
     The light sweet shadow of death, when dreams are deep
     And high as heaven whence light and lightning leap.

     And scarce a month yet gone, his living hand
       Writ loving words that sealed me friend of his.
     Are heaven and earth as near as sea to strand?
       May life and death as bride and bridegroom kiss?
       His last month's written word abides, and is;
     Clear as the sun that lit through storm and strife
     And darkling days when hope took fear to wife
     The faith whose fire was light of all his life.

     A life so fair, so pure of earthlier leaven,
       That none hath won through higher and harder ways
     The deathless life of death which earth calls heaven;
       Heaven, and the light of love on earth, and praise
       Of silent memory through subsiding days
     Wherein the light subsides not whence the past
     Feeds full with life the future. Time holds fast
     Their names whom faith forgets not, first and last.

     Forget? The dark forgets not dawn, nor we
       The suns that sink to rise again, and shine
     Lords of live years and ages. Earth and sea
       Forget not heaven that makes them seem divine,
       Though night put out their fires and bid their shrine
     Be dark and pale as storm and twilight. Day,
     Not night, is everlasting: life's full sway
     Bids death bow down as dead, and pass away.

     What part has death in souls that past all fear
       Win heavenward their supernal way, and smite
     With scorn sublime as heaven such dreams as here
       Plague and perplex with cloud and fire the light
       That leads men's waking souls from glimmering night
     To the awless heights of day, whereon man's awe,
     Transfigured, dies in rapture, seeing the law
     Sealed of the sun that earth arising saw?

     Faith, justice, mercy, love, and heaven-born hate
       That sets them all on fire and bids them be
     More than soft words and dreams that wake too late,
       Shone living through the lordly life that we
       Beheld, revered, and loved on earth, while he
     Dwelt here, and bade our eyes take light thereof;
     Light as from heaven that flamed or smiled above
     In light or fire whose very hate was love.

     No hate of man, but hate of hate whose foam
       Sheds poison forth from tongues of snakes and priests,
     And stains the sickening air with steams whence Rome
       Now feeds not full the God that slays and feasts;
       For now the fangs of all the ravenous beasts
     That ramped about him, fain of prayer and prey,
     Fulfil their lust no more: the tide of day
     Swells, and compels him down the deathward way.

     Night sucks the Church its creature down, and hell
       Yawns, heaves, and yearns to clasp its loathliest child
     Close to the breasts that bore it. All the spell
       Whence darkness saw the dawn in heaven defiled
       Is dumb as death: the lips that lied and smiled
     Wax white for fear as ashes. She that bore
     The banner up of darkness now no more
     Sheds night and fear and shame from shore to shore.

     When they that cast her kingdom down were born,
       North cried on south and east made moan to west
     For hopes that love had hardly heart to mourn,
       For Italy that was not. Kings on quest,
       By priests whose blessings burn as curses blest,
     Made spoil of souls and bodies bowed and bound,
     Hunted and harried, leashed as horse or hound,
     And hopeless of the hope that died unfound.

     And now that faith has brought forth fruit to time,
       How should not memory praise their names, and hold
     Their record even as Dante's life sublime,
       Who bade his dream, found fair and false of old,
       Live? Not till earth and heaven be dead and cold
     May man forget whose work and will made one
     Italy, fair as heaven or freedom won,
     And left their fame to shine beside her sun.

     _April 1890._




     THE FESTIVAL OF BEATRICE


     Dante, sole standing on the heavenward height,
       Beheld and heard one saying, "Behold me well:
       I am, I am Beatrice." Heaven and hell
     Kept silence, and the illimitable light
     Of all the stars was darkness in his sight
       Whose eyes beheld her eyes again, and fell
       Shame-stricken. Since her soul took flight to dwell
     In heaven, six hundred years have taken flight.

     And now that heavenliest part of earth whereon
     Shines yet their shadow as once their presence shone
       To her bears witness for his sake, as he
     For hers bare witness when her face was gone:
       No slave, no hospice now for grief--but free
       From shore to mountain and from Alp to sea.




     THE MONUMENT OF GIORDANO BRUNO


     I

     Not from without us, only from within,
       Comes or can ever come upon us light
       Whereby the soul keeps ever truth in sight.
     No truth, no strength, no comfort man may win,
     No grace for guidance, no release from sin,
       Save of his own soul's giving. Deep and bright
       As fire enkindled in the core of night
     Burns in the soul where once its fire has been
     The light that leads and quickens thought, inspired
       To doubt and trust and conquer. So he said
       Whom Sidney, flower of England, lordliest head
     Of all we love, loved: but the fates required
       A sacrifice to hate and hell, ere fame
       Should set with his in heaven Giordano's name.


     II

     Cover thine eyes and weep, O child of hell,
       Grey spouse of Satan, Church of name abhorred.
       Weep, withered harlot, with thy weeping lord,
     Now none will buy the heaven thou hast to sell
     At price of prostituted souls, and swell
       Thy loveless list of lovers. Fire and sword
       No more are thine: the steel, the wheel, the cord,
     The flames that rose round living limbs, and fell
     In lifeless ash and ember, now no more
       Approve thee godlike. Rome, redeemed at last
       From all the red pollution of thy past,
     Acclaims the grave bright face that smiled of yore
       Even on the fire that caught it round and clomb
       To cast its ashes on the face of Rome.

     _June 9, 1889._




     LIFE IN DEATH


     He should have followed who goes forth before us,
       Last born of us in life, in death first-born:
       The last to lift up eyes against the morn,
     The first to see the sunset. Life, that bore us
     Perchance for death to comfort and restore us,
       Of him hath left us here awhile forlorn,
       For him is as a garment overworn,
     And time and change, with suns and stars in chorus,
     Silent. But if, beyond all change or time,
     A law more just, more equal, more sublime
       Than sways the surge of life's loud sterile sea
     Sways that still world whose peace environs him,
     Where death lies dead as night when stars wax dim,
       Above all thought or hope of ours is he.

     _August 2, 1891._




     EPICEDE


     As a vesture shalt thou change them, said the prophet,
       And the raiment that was flesh is turned to dust;
     Dust and flesh and dust again the likeness of it,
       And the fine gold woven and worn of youth is rust.
     Hours that wax and wane salute the shade and scoff it,
       That it knows not aught it doth nor aught it must:
     Day by day the speeding soul makes haste to doff it,
       Night by night the pride of life resigns its trust.

     Sleep, whose silent notes of song loud life's derange not,
       Takes the trust in hand awhile as angels may:
     Joy with wings that rest not, grief with wings that range not,
       Guard the gates of sleep and waking, gold or grey.
     Joys that joys estrange, and griefs that griefs estrange not,
       Day that yearns for night, and night that yearns for day,
     As a vesture shalt thou change them, and they change not,
       Seeing that change may never change or pass away.

     Life of death makes question, "What art thou that changest?
       What am I, that fear should trust or faith should doubt?
     I that lighten, thou that darkenest and estrangest,
       Is it night or day that girds us round about?
     Light and darkness on the ways wherein thou rangest
       Seem as one, and beams as clouds they put to rout.
     Strange is hope, but fear of all things born were strangest,
       Seeing that none may strive with change to cast it out.

     "Change alone stands fast, thou sayest, O death: I know not:
       What art thou, my brother death, that thou shouldst know?
     Men may reap no fruits of fields wherein they sow not;
       Hope or fear is all the seed we have to sow.
     Winter seals the sacred springs up that they flow not:
       Wind and sun and change unbind them, and they flow.
     Am I thou or art thou I? The years that show not
       Pass, and leave no sign when time shall be to show."

     Hope makes suit to faith lest fear give ear to sorrow:
       Doubt strews dust upon his head, and goes his way.
     All the golden hope that life of death would borrow,
       How, if death require again, may life repay?
     Earth endures no darkness whence no light yearns thorough;
       God in man as light in darkness lives, they say:
     Yet, would midnight take assurance of the morrow,
       Who shall pledge the faith or seal the bond of day?

     Darkness, mute or loud with music or with mourning,
       Starry darkness, winged with wind or clothed with calm,
     Dreams no dream of grief or fear or wrath or warning,
       Bears no sign of race or goal or strife or palm.
     Word of blessing, word of mocking or of scorning,
       Knows it none, nor whence its breath sheds blight or balm.
     Yet a little while, and hark, the psalm of morning:
       Yet a little while, and silence takes the psalm.

     All the comfort, all the worship, all the wonder,
       All the light of love that darkness holds in fee,
     All the song that silence keeps or keeps not under,
       Night, the soul that knows gives thanks for all to thee.
     Far beyond the gates that morning strikes in sunder,
       Hopes that grief makes holy, dreams that fear sets free,
     Far above the throne of thought, the lair of thunder,
       Silent shines the word whose utterance fills the sea.




     MEMORIAL VERSES ON THE DEATH OF WILLIAM BELL SCOTT


     A life more bright than the sun's face, bowed
     Through stress of season and coil of cloud,
         Sets: and the sorrow that casts out fear
     Scarce deems him dead in his chill still shroud,

     Dead on the breast of the dying year,
     Poet and painter and friend, thrice dear
         For love of the suns long set, for love
     Of song that sets not with sunset here,

     For love of the fervent heart, above
     Their sense who saw not the swift light move
         That filled with sense of the loud sun's lyre
     The thoughts that passion was fain to prove

     In fervent labour of high desire
     And faith that leapt from its own quenched pyre
         Alive and strong as the sun, and caught
     From darkness light, and from twilight fire.

     Passion, deep as the depths unsought
     Whence faith's own hope may redeem us nought,
         Filled full with ardour of pain sublime
     His mourning song and his mounting thought.

     Elate with sense of a sterner time,
     His hand's flight clomb as a bird's might climb
         Calvary: dark in the darkling air
     That shrank for fear of the crowning crime,

     Three crosses rose on the hillside bare,
     Shown scarce by grace of the lightning's glare
         That clove the veil of the temple through
     And smote the priests on the threshold there.

     The soul that saw it, the hand that drew,
     Whence light as thought's or as faith's glance flew,
         And stung to life the sepulchral past,
     And bade the stars of it burn anew,

     Held no less than the dead world fast
     The light live shadows about them cast,
         The likeness living of dawn and night,
     The days that pass and the dreams that last.

     Thought, clothed round with sorrow as light,
     Dark as a cloud that the moon turns bright,
         Moved, as a wind on the striving sea,
     That yearns and quickens and flags in flight,

     Through forms of colour and song that he
     Who fain would have set its wide wings free
         Cast round it, clothing or chaining hope
     With lights that last not and shades that flee.

     Scarce in song could his soul find scope,
     Scarce the strength of his hand might ope
         Art's inmost gate of her sovereign shrine,
     To cope with heaven as a man may cope.

     But high as the hope of a man may shine
     The faith, the fervour, the life divine
         That thrills our life and transfigures, rose
     And shone resurgent, a sunbright sign,

     Through shapes whereunder the strong soul glows
     And fills them full as a sunlit rose
         With sense and fervour of life, whose light
     The fool's eye knows not, the man's eye knows.

     None that can read or divine aright
     The scriptures writ of the soul may slight
         The strife of a strenuous soul to show
     More than the craft of the hand may write.

     None may slight it, and none may know
     How high the flames that aspire and glow
         From heart and spirit and soul may climb
     And triumph; higher than the souls lie low

     Whose hearing hears not the livelong rhyme,
     Whose eyesight sees not the light sublime,
         That shines, that sounds, that ascends and lives
     Unquenched of change, unobscured of time.

     A long life's length, as a man's life gives
     Space for the spirit that soars and strives
         To strive and soar, has the soul shone through
     That heeds not whither the world's wind drives

     Now that the days and the ways it knew
     Are strange, are dead as the dawn's grey dew
         At high midnoon of the mounting day
     That mocks the might of the dawn it slew.

     Yet haply may not--and haply may--
     No sense abide of the dead sun's ray
         Wherein the soul that outsoars us now
     Rejoiced with ours in its radiant sway.

     Hope may hover, and doubt may bow,
     Dreaming. Haply--they dream not how--
         Not life but death may indeed be dead
     When silence darkens the dead man's brow.

     Hope, whose name is remembrance, fed
     With love that lightens from seasons fled,
         Dreams, and craves not indeed to know,
     That death and life are as souls that wed.

     But change that falls on the heart like snow
     Can chill not memory nor hope, that show
         The soul, the spirit, the heart and head,
     Alive above us who strive below.




     AN OLD SAYING


     Many waters cannot quench love,
       Neither can the floods drown it.
     Who shall snare or slay the white dove
       Faith, whose very dreams crown it,
     Gird it round with grace and peace, deep,
     Warm, and pure, and soft as sweet sleep?
     Many waters cannot quench love,
       Neither can the floods drown it.

     Set me as a seal upon thine heart,
       As a seal upon thine arm.
     How should we behold the days depart
       And the nights resign their charm?
     Love is as the soul: though hate and fear
     Waste and overthrow, they strike not here.
     Set me as a seal upon thine heart,
       As a seal upon thine arm.




     A MOSS-ROSE


     If the rose of all flowers be the rarest
       That heaven may adore from above,
     And the fervent moss-rose be the fairest
       That sweetens the summer with love,

     Can it be that a fairer than any
       Should blossom afar from the tree?
     Yet one, and a symbol of many,
       Shone sudden for eyes that could see.

     In the grime and the gloom of November
       The bliss and the bloom of July
     Bade autumn rejoice and remember
       The balm of the blossoms gone by.

     Would you know what moss-rose now it may be
       That puts all the rest to the blush,
     The flower was the face of a baby,
       The moss was a bonnet of plush.




     TO A CAT


     I

     Stately, kindly, lordly friend,
           Condescend
     Here to sit by me, and turn
     Glorious eyes that smile and burn,
     Golden eyes, love's lustrous meed,
     On the golden page I read.

     All your wondrous wealth of hair,
           Dark and fair,
     Silken-shaggy, soft and bright
     As the clouds and beams of night,
     Pays my reverent hand's caress
     Back with friendlier gentleness.

     Dogs may fawn on all and some
           As they come;
     You, a friend of loftier mind,
     Answer friends alone in kind.
     Just your foot upon my hand
     Softly bids it understand.

     Morning round this silent sweet
           Garden-seat
     Sheds its wealth of gathering light,
     Thrills the gradual clouds with might,
     Changes woodland, orchard, heath,
     Lawn, and garden there beneath.

     Fair and dim they gleamed below:
           Now they glow
     Deep as even your sunbright eyes,
     Fair as even the wakening skies.
     Can it not or can it be
     Now that you give thanks to see?

     May not you rejoice as I,
           Seeing the sky
     Change to heaven revealed, and bid
     Earth reveal the heaven it hid
     All night long from stars and moon,
     Now the sun sets all in tune?

     What within you wakes with day
           Who can say?
     All too little may we tell,
     Friends who like each other well,
     What might haply, if we might,
     Bid us read our lives aright.


     II

     Wild on woodland ways your sires
           Flashed like fires;
     Fair as flame and fierce and fleet
     As with wings on wingless feet
     Shone and sprang your mother, free,
     Bright and brave as wind or sea.

     Free and proud and glad as they,
           Here to-day
     Rests or roams their radiant child,
     Vanquished not, but reconciled,
     Free from curb of aught above
     Save the lovely curb of love.

     Love through dreams of souls divine
           Fain would shine
     Round a dawn whose light and song
     Then should right our mutual wrong--
     Speak, and seal the love-lit law
     Sweet Assisi's seer foresaw.

     Dreams were theirs; yet haply may
           Dawn a day
     When such friends and fellows born,
     Seeing our earth as fair at morn,
     May for wiser love's sake see
     More of heaven's deep heart than we.




     HAWTHORN DYKE


     All the golden air is full of balm and bloom
       Where the hawthorns line the shelving dyke with flowers.
       Joyous children born of April's happiest hours,
     High and low they laugh and lighten, knowing their doom
     Bright as brief--to bless and cheer they know not whom,
       Heed not how, but washed and warmed with suns and showers
       Smile, and bid the sweet soft gradual banks and bowers
     Thrill with love of sunlit fire or starry gloom.
     All our moors and lawns all round rejoice; but here
     All the rapturous resurrection of the year
     Finds the radiant utterance perfect, sees the word
     Spoken, hears the light that speaks it. Far and near,
       All the world is heaven: and man and flower and bird
       Here are one at heart with all things seen and heard.




     THE BROTHERS


     There were twa brethren fell on strife;
       Sweet fruits are sair to gather:
     The tane has reft his brother of life;
       And the wind wears owre the heather.

     There were twa brethren fell to fray;
       Sweet fruits are sair to gather:
     The tane is clad in a cloak of clay;
       And the wind wears owre the heather.

     O loud and loud was the live man's cry,
       (Sweet fruits are sair to gather)
     "Would God the dead and the slain were I!"
       And the wind wears owre the heather.

     "O sair was the wrang and sair the fray,"
       (Sweet fruits are sair to gather)
     "But liefer had love be slain than slay."
       And the wind wears owre the heather.

     "O sweet is the life that sleeps at hame,"
       (Sweet fruits are sair to gather)
     "But I maun wake on a far sea's faem."
       And the wind wears owre the heather.

     "And women are fairest of a' things fair,"
       (Sweet fruits are sair to gather)
     "But never shall I kiss woman mair."
       And the wind wears owre the heather.

     Between the birk and the aik and the thorn
       (Sweet fruits are sair to gather)
     He's laid his brother to lie forlorn:
       And the wind wears owre the heather.

     Between the bent and the burn and the broom
       (Sweet fruits are sair to gather)
     He's laid him to sleep till dawn of doom:
       And the wind wears owre the heather.

     He's tane him owre the waters wide,
       (Sweet fruits are sair to gather)
     Afar to fleet and afar to bide:
       And the wind wears owre the heather.

     His hair was yellow, his cheek was red,
       (Sweet fruits are sair to gather)
     When he set his face to the wind and fled:
       And the wind wears owre the heather.

     His banes were stark and his een were bright
       (Sweet fruits are sair to gather)
     When he set his face to the sea by night:
       And the wind wears owre the heather.

     His cheek was wan and his hair was grey
       (Sweet fruits are sair to gather)
     When he came back hame frae the wide world's way:
       And the wind wears owre the heather.

     His banes were weary, his een were dim,
       (Sweet fruits are sair to gather)
     And nae man lived and had mind of him:
       And the wind wears owre the heather.

     "O whatten a wreck wad they seek on land"
       (Sweet fruits are sair to gather)
     "That they houk the turf to the seaward hand?"
       And the wind wears owre the heather.

     "O whatten a prey wad they think to take"
       (Sweet fruits are sair to gather)
     "That they delve the dykes for a dead man's sake?"
       And the wind wears owre the heather.

     A bane of the dead in his hand he's tane;
       Sweet fruits are sair to gather:
     And the red blood brak frae the dead white bane.
       And the wind wears owre the heather.

     He's cast it forth of his auld faint hand;
       Sweet fruits are sair to gather:
     And the red blood ran on the wan wet sand.
       And the wind wears owre the heather.

     "O whatten a slayer is this," they said,
       (Sweet fruits are sair to gather)
     "That the straik of his hand should raise his dead?"
       And the wind wears owre the heather.

     "O weel is me for the sign I take"
       (Sweet fruits are sair to gather)
     "That now I may die for my auld sin's sake."
       And the wind wears owre the heather.

     "For the dead was in wait now fifty year,"
       (Sweet fruits are sair to gather)
     "And now shall I die for his blood's sake here."
       And the wind wears owre the heather.




     JACOBITE SONG


     Now who will speak, and lie not,
       And pledge not life, but give?
     Slaves herd with herded cattle:
     The dawn grows bright for battle,
     And if we die, we die not;
       And if we live, we live.

     The faith our fathers fought for,
       The kings our fathers knew,
     We fight but as they fought for:
     We seek the goal they sought for,
       The chance they hailed and knew,
     The praise they strove and wrought for,
       To leave their blood as dew
       On fields that flower anew.

     Men live that serve the stranger;
       Hounds live that huntsmen tame:
     These life-days of our living
     Are days of God's good giving
     Where death smiles soft on danger
       And life scowls dark on shame.

     And what would you do other,
       Sweet wife, if you were I?
     And how should you be other,
     My sister, than your brother,
       If you were man as I,
     Born of our sire and mother,
       With choice to cower and fly,
       And chance to strike and die?

     No churl's our oldworld name is,
       The lands we leave are fair:
     But fairer far than these are,
     But wide as all the seas are,
     But high as heaven the fame is
       That if we die we share.

     Our name the night may swallow,
       Our lands the churl may take:
     But night nor death may swallow,
     Nor hell's nor heaven's dim hollow,
       The star whose height we take,
     The star whose light we follow
       For faith's unfaltering sake
       Till hope that sleeps awake.

     Soft hope's light lure we serve not,
       Nor follow, fain to find:
     Dark time's last word may smite her
     Dead, ere man's falsehood blight her,
     But though she die, we swerve not,
       Who cast not eye behind.

     Faith speaks when hope dissembles:
       Faith lives when hope lies dead:
     If death as life dissembles,
     And all that night assembles
       Of stars at dawn lie dead,
     Faint hope that smiles and trembles
       May tell not well for dread:
       But faith has heard it said.

     Now who will fight, and fly not,
       And grudge not life to give?
     And who will strike beside us,
     If life's or death's light guide us?
     For if we live, we die not,
       And if we die, we live.




     THE BALLAD OF DEAD MEN'S BAY


     The sea swings owre the slants of sand,
       All white with winds that drive;
     The sea swirls up to the still dim strand,
       Where nae man comes alive.

     At the grey soft edge of the fruitless surf
       A light flame sinks and springs;
     At the grey soft rim of the flowerless turf
       A low flame leaps and clings.

     What light is this on a sunless shore,
       What gleam on a starless sea?
     Was it earth's or hell's waste womb that bore
       Such births as should not be?

     As lithe snakes turning, as bright stars burning,
       They bicker and beckon and call;
     As wild waves churning, as wild winds yearning,
       They flicker and climb and fall.

     A soft strange cry from the landward rings--
       "What ails the sea to shine?"
     A keen sweet note from the spray's rim springs--
       "What fires are these of thine?"

     A soul am I that was born on earth
       For ae day's waesome span:
     Death bound me fast on the bourn of birth
       Ere I were christened man.

     "A light by night, I fleet and fare
       Till the day of wrath and woe;
     On the hems of earth and the skirts of air
       Winds hurl me to and fro."

     "O well is thee, though the weird be strange
       That bids thee flit and flee;
     For hope is child of the womb of change,
       And hope keeps watch with thee.

     "When the years are gone, and the time is come,
       God's grace may give thee grace;
     And thy soul may sing, though thy soul were dumb,
       And shine before God's face.

     "But I, that lighten and revel and roll
       With the foam of the plunging sea,
     No sign is mine of a breathing soul
       That God should pity me.

     "Nor death, nor heaven, nor hell, nor birth
       Hath part in me nor mine:
     Strong lords are these of the living earth
       And loveless lords of thine.

     "But I that know nor lord nor life
       More sure than storm or spray,
     Whose breath is made of sport and strife,
       Whereon shall I find stay?"

     "And wouldst thou change thy doom with me,
       Full fain with thee would I:
     For the life that lightens and lifts the sea
       Is more than earth or sky.

     "And what if the day of doubt and doom
       Shall save nor smite not me?
     I would not rise from the slain world's tomb
       If there be no more sea.

     "Take he my soul that gave my soul,
       And give it thee to keep;
     And me, while seas and stars shall roll
       Thy life that falls on sleep."

     That word went up through the mirk mid sky,
       And even to God's own ear:
     And the Lord was ware of the keen twin cry,
       And wroth was he to hear.

     He's tane the soul of the unsained child
       That fled to death from birth;
     He's tane the light of the wan sea wild,
       And bid it burn on earth.

     He's given the ghaist of the babe new-born
       The gift of the water-sprite,
     To ride on revel from morn to morn
       And roll from night to night.

     He's given the sprite of the wild wan sea
       The gift of the new-born man,
     A soul for ever to bide and be
       When the years have filled their span.

     When a year was gone and a year was come,
       O loud and loud cried they--
     "For the lee-lang year thou hast held us dumb
       Take now thy gifts away!"

     O loud and lang they cried on him,
       And sair and sair they prayed:
     "Is the face of thy grace as the night's face grim
       For those thy wrath has made?"

     A cry more bitter than tears of men
       From the rim of the dim grey sea;--
     "Give me my living soul again,
       The soul thou gavest me,
     The doom and the dole of kindly men,
       To bide my weird and be!"

     A cry more keen from the wild low land
       Than the wail of waves that roll;--
     "Take back the gift of a loveless hand,
       Thy gift of doom and dole,
     The weird of men that bide on land;
       Take from me, take my soul!"

     The hands that smite are the hands that spare;
       They build and break the tomb;
     They turn to darkness and dust and air
       The fruits of the waste earth's womb;
     But never the gift of a granted prayer,
       The dole of a spoken doom.

     Winds may change at a word unheard,
       But none may change the tides:
     The prayer once heard is as God's own word;
       The doom once dealt abides.

     And ever a cry goes up by day,
       And ever a wail by night;
     And nae ship comes by the weary bay
     But her shipmen hear them wail and pray,
       And see with earthly sight
     The twofold flames of the twin lights play
     Where the sea-banks green and the sea-floods grey
     Are proud of peril and fain of prey,
     And the sand quakes ever; and ill fare they
       That look upon that light.




     DEDICATION

     1893


     The sea of the years that endure not
       Whose tide shall endure till we die
     And know what the seasons assure not,
       If death be or life be a lie,
     Sways hither the spirit and thither,
       A waif in the swing of the sea
     Whose wrecks are of memories that wither
           As leaves of a tree.

     We hear not and hail not with greeting
       The sound of the wings of the years,
     The storm of the sound of them beating,
       That none till it pass from him hears:
     But tempest nor calm can imperil
       The treasures that fade not or fly;
     Change bids them not change and be sterile,
           Death bids them not die.

     Hearts plighted in youth to the royal
       High service of hope and of song,
     Sealed fast for endurance as loyal,
       And proved of the years as they throng,
     Conceive not, believe not, and fear not
       That age may be other than youth;
     That faith and that friendship may hear not
           And utter not truth.

     Not yesterday's light nor to-morrow's
       Gleams nearer or clearer than gleams,
     Though joys be forgotten and sorrows
       Forgotten as changes of dreams,
     The dawn of the days unforgotten
       That noon could eclipse not or slay,
     Whose fruits were as children begotten
           Of dawn upon day.

     The years that were flowerful and fruitless,
       The years that were fruitful and dark,
     The hopes that were radiant and rootless,
       The hopes that were winged for their mark,
     Lie soft in the sepulchres fashioned
       Of hours that arise and subside,
     Absorbed and subdued and impassioned,
           In pain or in pride.

     But far in the night that entombs them
       The starshine as sunshine is strong,
     And clear through the cloud that resumes them
       Remembrance, a light and a song,
     Rings lustrous as music and hovers
       As birds that impend on the sea,
     And thoughts that their prison-house covers
           Arise and are free.

     Forgetfulness deep as a prison
       Holds days that are dead for us fast
     Till the sepulchre sees rearisen
       The spirit whose reign is the past,
     Disentrammelled of darkness, and kindled
       With life that is mightier than death,
     When the life that obscured it has dwindled
           And passed as a breath.

     But time nor oblivion may darken
       Remembrance whose name will be joy
     While memory forgets not to hearken,
       While manhood forgets not the boy
     Who heard and exulted in hearing
       The songs of the sunrise of youth
     Ring radiant above him, unfearing
           And joyous as truth.

     Truth, winged and enkindled with rapture
       And sense of the radiance of yore,
     Fulfilled you with power to recapture
       What never might singer before--
     The life, the delight, and the sorrow
       Of troublous and chivalrous years
     That knew not of night or of morrow,
           Of hopes or of fears.

     But wider the wing and the vision
       That quicken the spirit have spread
     Since memory beheld with derision
       Man's hope to be more than his dead.
     From the mists and the snows and the thunders
       Your spirit has brought for us forth
     Light, music, and joy in the wonders
           And charms of the north.

     The wars and the woes and the glories
       That quicken and lighten and rain
     From the clouds of its chronicled stories,
       The passion, the pride, and the pain,
     Whose echoes were mute and the token
       Was lost of the spells that they spake,
     Rise bright at your bidding, unbroken
           Of ages that break.

     For you, and for none of us other,
       Time is not: the dead that must live
     Hold commune with you as a brother
       By grace of the life that you give.
     The heart that was in them is in you,
       Their soul in your spirit endures:
     The strength of their song is the sinew
           Of this that is yours.

     Hence is it that life, everlasting
       As light and as music, abides
     In the sound of the surge of it, casting
       Sound back to the surge of the tides,
     Till sons of the sons of the Norsemen
       Watch, hurtling to windward and lee,
     Round England, unbacked of her horsemen,
           The steeds of the sea.






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Astrophel and Other Poems, by 
Algernon Charles Swinburne

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ASTROPHEL AND OTHER POEMS ***

***** This file should be named 18673-8.txt or 18673-8.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/1/8/6/7/18673/

Produced by Paul Murray, Lisa Reigel, and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

*** END: FULL LICENSE ***


﻿The Project Gutenberg EBook of A Channel Passage and Other Poems, by 
Algernon Charles Swinburne

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: A Channel Passage and Other Poems
       Taken from The Collected Poetical Works of Algernon Charles
       Swinburne--Vol VI

Author: Algernon Charles Swinburne

Release Date: July 19, 2006 [EBook #18871]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK A CHANNEL PASSAGE AND OTHER POEMS ***




Produced by Paul Murray, Lisa Reigel, and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net





[TRANSCRIBER'S NOTE: Greek words in this text have been transliterated
and placed between +marks+. The word "Phoebus" was rendered with an oe
ligature in the original.]




A Channel Passage and other poems


By

Algernon Charles Swinburne


Taken from The Collected Poetical Works of Algernon Charles
Swinburne--Vol VI




THE COLLECTED POETICAL WORKS OF ALGERNON CHARLES SWINBURNE

VOL. VI


A MIDSUMMER HOLIDAY: ASTROPHEL: A CHANNEL PASSAGE AND OTHER TALES




SWINBURNE'S POETICAL WORKS


  I. POEMS AND BALLADS (First Series).

 II. SONGS BEFORE SUNRISE, AND SONGS OF TWO NATIONS.

III. POEMS AND BALLADS (Second and Third Series), and SONGS OF THE
       SPRINGTIDES.

 IV. TRISTRAM OF LYONESSE, THE TALE OF BALEN, ATALANTA IN CALYDON,
       ERECHTHEUS.

  V. STUDIES IN SONG, A CENTURY OF ROUNDELS, SONNETS ON ENGLISH DRAMATIC
       POETS, THE HEPTALOGIA, ETC.

 VI. A MIDSUMMER HOLIDAY, ASTROPHEL, A CHANNEL PASSAGE AND OTHER POEMS.


LONDON: WILLIAM HEINEMANN




A MIDSUMMER HOLIDAY: ASTROPHEL: A CHANNEL PASSAGE AND OTHER POEMS


By

Algernon Charles Swinburne


1917

LONDON: WILLIAM HEINEMANN


_First printed_ (_Chatto_), 1904

_Reprinted_ 1904, '09, '10, '12

(_Heinemann_), 1917


_London: William Heinemann_, 1917




A CHANNEL PASSAGE AND OTHER POEMS


                                                   PAGE

A CHANNEL PASSAGE                                   279

THE LAKE OF GAUBE                                   284

THE PROMISE OF THE HAWTHORN                         288

HAWTHORN TIDE                                       289

THE PASSING OF THE HAWTHORN                         296

TO A BABY KINSWOMAN                                 297

THE ALTAR OF RIGHTEOUSNESS                          301

A NEW YEAR'S EVE                                    321

IN A ROSARY                                         324

THE HIGH OAKS                                       326

BARKING HALL: A YEAR AFTER                          331

MUSIC: AN ODE                                       334

THE CENTENARY OF THE BATTLE OF THE NILE             336

TRAFALGAR DAY                                       338

CROMWELL'S STATUE                                   340

A WORD FOR THE NAVY                                 342

NORTHUMBERLAND                                      346

STRATFORD-ON-AVON                                   349

BURNS: AN ODE                                       350

THE COMMONWEAL: A SONG FOR UNIONISTS                355

THE QUESTION                                        359

APOSTASY                                            363

RUSSIA: AN ODE                                      366

FOR GREECE AND CRETE                                370

DELPHIC HYMN TO APOLLO                              372

A NEW CENTURY                                       374

AN EVENING AT VICHY                                 375

TO GEORGE FREDERICK WATTS                           378

ON THE DEATH OF MRS. LYNN LINTON                    379

IN MEMORY OF AURELIO SAFFI                          382

CARNOT                                              383

AFTER THE VERDICT                                   384

THE TRANSVAAL                                       385

REVERSE                                             386

THE TURNING OF THE TIDE                             387

ON THE DEATH OF COLONEL BENSON                      388

ASTRÆA VICTRIX                                      389

THE FIRST OF JUNE                                   393

A ROUNDEL FROM VILLON                               395

A ROUNDEL OF RABELAIS                               396

LUCIFER                                             397

THE CENTENARY OF ALEXANDRE DUMAS                    398

AT A DOG'S GRAVE                                    400

THREE WEEKS OLD                                     402

A CLASP OF HANDS                                    403

PROLOGUE TO DOCTOR FAUSTUS                          405

PROLOGUE TO ARDEN OF FEVERSHAM                      407

PROLOGUE TO OLD FORTUNATUS                          409

PROLOGUE TO THE DUCHESS OF MALFY                    411

PROLOGUE TO THE REVENGER'S TRAGEDY                  413

PROLOGUE TO THE BROKEN HEART                        415

PROLOGUE TO A VERY WOMAN                            417

PROLOGUE TO THE SPANISH GIPSY                       419

PROLOGUE TO THE TWO NOBLE KINSMEN                   421

THE AFTERGLOW OF SHAKESPEARE                        423

CLEOPATRA                                           427

DEDICATION                                          435




A CHANNEL PASSAGE AND OTHER POEMS


IN MEMORY

OF

WILLIAM MORRIS

AND

EDWARD BURNE JONES




     A CHANNEL PASSAGE

     1855


     Forth from Calais, at dawn of night, when sunset summer on autumn
           shone,
     Fared the steamer alert and loud through seas whence only the sun
           was gone:
     Soft and sweet as the sky they smiled, and bade man welcome: a dim
           sweet hour
     Gleamed and whispered in wind and sea, and heaven was fair as a
           field in flower.
     Stars fulfilled the desire of the darkling world as with music: the
           starbright air
     Made the face of the sea, if aught may make the face of the sea,
           more fair.

     Whence came change? Was the sweet night weary of rest? What anguish
           awoke in the dark?
     Sudden, sublime, the strong storm spake: we heard the thunders as
           hounds that bark.
     Lovelier if aught may be lovelier than stars, we saw the lightnings
           exalt the sky,
     Living and lustrous and rapturous as love that is born but to
           quicken and lighten and die.
     Heaven's own heart at its highest of delight found utterance in
           music and semblance in fire:
     Thunder on thunder exulted, rejoicing to live and to satiate the
           night's desire.

     And the night was alive and anhungered of life as a tiger from
           toils cast free:
     And a rapture of rage made joyous the spirit and strength of the
           soul of the sea.
     All the weight of the wind bore down on it, freighted with death
           for fraught:
     And the keen waves kindled and quickened as things transfigured or
           things distraught.
     And madness fell on them laughing and leaping; and madness came on
           the wind:
     And the might and the light and the darkness of storm were as storm
           in the heart of Ind.
     Such glory, such terror, such passion, as lighten and harrow the
           far fierce East,
     Rang, shone, spake, shuddered around us: the night was an altar
           with death for priest.
     The channel that sunders England from shores where never was man
           born free
     Was clothed with the likeness and thrilled with the strength and
           the wrath of a tropic sea.
     As a wild steed ramps in rebellion, and rears till it swerves from
           a backward fall,
     The strong ship struggled and reared, and her deck was upright as a
           sheer cliff's wall.
     Stern and prow plunged under, alternate: a glimpse, a recoil, a
           breath,
     And she sprang as the life in a god made man would spring at the
           throat of death.
     Three glad hours, and it seemed not an hour of supreme and supernal
           joy,
     Filled full with delight that revives in remembrance a sea-bird's
           heart in a boy.
     For the central crest of the night was cloud that thundered and
           flamed, sublime
     As the splendour and song of the soul everlasting that quickens the
           pulse of time.
     The glory beholden of man in a vision, the music of light
           overheard,
     The rapture and radiance of battle, the life that abides in the
           fire of a word,
     In the midmost heaven enkindled, was manifest far on the face of
           the sea,
     And the rage in the roar of the voice of the waters was heard but
           when heaven breathed free.
     Far eastward, clear of the covering of cloud, the sky laughed out
           into light
     From the rims of the storm to the sea's dark edge with flames that
           were flowerlike and white.
     The leaping and luminous blossoms of live sheet lightning that
           laugh as they fade
     From the cloud's black base to the black wave's brim rejoiced in
           the light they made.
     Far westward, throned in a silent sky, where life was in lustrous
           tune,
     Shone, sweeter and surer than morning or evening, the steadfast
           smile of the moon.
     The limitless heaven that enshrined them was lovelier than dreams
           may behold, and deep
     As life or as death, revealed and transfigured, may shine on the
           soul through sleep.
     All glories of toil and of triumph and passion and pride that it
           yearns to know
     Bore witness there to the soul of its likeness and kinship, above
           and below.
     The joys of the lightnings, the songs of the thunders, the strong
           sea's labour and rage,
     Were tokens and signs of the war that is life and is joy for the
           soul to wage.
     No thought strikes deeper or higher than the heights and the depths
           that the night made bare,
     Illimitable, infinite, awful and joyful, alive in the summit of
           air--
     Air stilled and thrilled by the tempest that thundered between its
           reign and the sea's,
     Rebellious, rapturous, and transient as faith or as terror that
           bows men's knees.
     No love sees loftier and fairer the form of its godlike vision in
           dreams
     Than the world shone then, when the sky and the sea were as love
           for a breath's length seems--
     One utterly, mingled and mastering and mastered and laughing with
           love that subsides
     As the glad mad night sank panting and satiate with storm, and
           released the tides.
     In the dense mid channel the steam-souled ship hung hovering,
           assailed and withheld
     As a soul born royal, if life or if death be against it, is
           thwarted and quelled.
     As the glories of myriads of glowworms in lustrous grass on a
           boundless lawn
     Were the glories of flames phosphoric that made of the water a
           light like dawn.
     A thousand Phosphors, a thousand Hespers, awoke in the churning
           sea,
     And the swift soft hiss of them living and dying was clear as a
           tune could be;
     As a tune that is played by the fingers of death on the keys of
           life or of sleep,
     Audible alway alive in the storm, too fleet for a dream to keep:
     Too fleet, too sweet for a dream to recover and thought to remember
           awake:
     Light subtler and swifter than lightning, that whispers and laughs
           in the live storm's wake,
     In the wild bright wake of the storm, in the dense loud heart of
           the labouring hour,
     A harvest of stars by the storm's hand reaped, each fair as a
           star-shaped flower.
     And sudden and soft as the passing of sleep is the passing of
           tempest seemed
     When the light and the sound of it sank, and the glory was gone as
           a dream half dreamed.
     The glory, the terror, the passion that made of the midnight a
           miracle, died,
     Not slain at a stroke, nor in gradual reluctance abated of power
           and of pride;
     With strong swift subsidence, awful as power that is wearied of
           power upon earth,
     As a God that were wearied of power upon heaven, and were fain of a
           new God's birth,
     The might of the night subsided: the tyranny kindled in darkness
           fell:
     And the sea and the sky put off them the rapture and radiance of
           heaven and of hell.
     The waters, heaving and hungering at heart, made way, and were
           wellnigh fain,
     For the ship that had fought them, and wrestled, and revelled in
           labour, to cease from her pain.
     And an end was made of it: only remembrance endures of the glad
           loud strife;
     And the sense that a rapture so royal may come not again in the
           passage of life.




     THE LAKE OF GAUBE


     The sun is lord and god, sublime, serene,
       And sovereign on the mountains: earth and air
     Lie prone in passion, blind with bliss unseen
       By force of sight and might of rapture, fair
       As dreams that die and know not what they were.
     The lawns, the gorges, and the peaks, are one
     Glad glory, thrilled with sense of unison
     In strong compulsive silence of the sun.

     Flowers dense and keen as midnight stars aflame
       And living things of light like flames in flower
     That glance and flash as though no hand might tame
       Lightnings whose life outshone their stormlit hour
       And played and laughed on earth, with all their power
     Gone, and with all their joy of life made long
     And harmless as the lightning life of song,
     Shine sweet like stars when darkness feels them strong.

     The deep mild purple flaked with moonbright gold
      That makes the scales seem flowers of hardened light,
     The flamelike tongue, the feet that noon leaves cold,
       The kindly trust in man, when once the sight
       Grew less than strange, and faith bade fear take flight,
     Outlive the little harmless life that shone
     And gladdened eyes that loved it, and was gone
     Ere love might fear that fear had looked thereon.

     Fear held the bright thing hateful, even as fear,
       Whose name is one with hate and horror, saith
     That heaven, the dark deep heaven of water near,
       Is deadly deep as hell and dark as death.
       The rapturous plunge that quickens blood and breath
     With pause more sweet than passion, ere they strive
     To raise again the limbs that yet would dive
     Deeper, should there have slain the soul alive.

     As the bright salamander in fire of the noonshine exults and is
           glad of his day,
     The spirit that quickens my body rejoices to pass from the sunlight
           away,
     To pass from the glow of the mountainous flowerage, the high
           multitudinous bloom,
     Far down through the fathomless night of the water, the gladness of
           silence and gloom.
     Death-dark and delicious as death in the dream of a lover and
           dreamer may be,
     It clasps and encompasses body and soul with delight to be living
           and free:
     Free utterly now, though the freedom endure but the space of a
           perilous breath,
     And living, though girdled about with the darkness and coldness and
           strangeness of death:
     Each limb and each pulse of the body rejoicing, each nerve of the
           spirit at rest,
     All sense of the soul's life rapture, a passionate peace in its
           blindness blest.
     So plunges the downward swimmer, embraced of the water unfathomed
           of man,
     The darkness unplummeted, icier than seas in midwinter, for
           blessing or ban;
     And swiftly and sweetly, when strength and breath fall short, and
           the dive is done,
     Shoots up as a shaft from the dark depth shot, sped straight into
           sight of the sun;
     And sheer through the snow-soft water, more dark than the roof of
           the pines above,
     Strikes forth, and is glad as a bird whose flight is impelled and
           sustained of love.
     As a sea-mew's love of the sea-wind breasted and ridden for
           rapture's sake
     Is the love of his body and soul for the darkling delight of the
           soundless lake:
     As the silent speed of a dream too living to live for a thought's
           space more
     Is the flight of his limbs through the still strong chill of the
           darkness from shore to shore.
     Might life be as this is and death be as life that casts off time
           as a robe,
     The likeness of infinite heaven were a symbol revealed of the lake
           of Gaube.

     Whose thought has fathomed and measured
       The darkness of life and of death,
     The secret within them treasured,
       The spirit that is not breath?
     Whose vision has yet beholden
       The splendour of death and of life?
     Though sunset as dawn be golden,
       Is the word of them peace, not strife?
     Deep silence answers: the glory
       We dream of may be but a dream,
     And the sun of the soul wax hoary
       As ashes that show not a gleam.
     But well shall it be with us ever
       Who drive through the darkness here,
     If the soul that we live by never,
       For aught that a lie saith, fear.




     THE PROMISE OF THE HAWTHORN


     Spring sleeps and stirs and trembles with desire
       Pure as a babe's that nestles toward the breast.
     The world, as yet an all unstricken lyre,
       With all its chords alive and all at rest,
     Feels not the sun's hand yet, but feels his breath
       And yearns for love made perfect. Man and bird,
     Thrilled through with hope of life that casts out death,
       Wait with a rapturous patience till his word
     Speak heaven, and flower by flower and tree by tree
       Give back the silent strenuous utterance. Earth,
     Alive awhile and joyful as the sea,
       Laughs not aloud in joy too deep for mirth,
     Presageful of perfection of delight,
     Till all the unborn green buds be born in white.




     HAWTHORN TIDE


     I

     Dawn is alive in the world, and the darkness of heaven and of earth
     Subsides in the light of a smile more sweet than the loud noon's
           mirth,
     Spring lives as a babe lives, glad and divine as the sun, and
           unsure
     If aught so divine and so glad may be worshipped and loved and
           endure.
     A soft green glory suffuses the love-lit earth with delight,
     And the face of the noon is fair as the face of the star-clothed
           night.
     Earth knows not and doubts not at heart of the glories again to be:
     Sleep doubts not and dreams not how sweet shall the waking beyond
           her be.
     A whole white world of revival awaits May's whisper awhile,
     Abides and exults in the bud as a soft hushed laugh in a smile.
     As a maid's mouth laughing with love and subdued for the love's
           sake, May
     Shines and withholds for a little the word she revives to say.

     When the clouds and the winds and the sunbeams are warring and
           strengthening with joy that they live,
       Spring, from reluctance enkindled to rapture, from slumber to
           strife,
     Stirs, and repents, and is winter, and weeps, and awakes as the
           frosts forgive,
       And the dark chill death of the woodland is troubled, and dies
           into life.
     And the honey of heaven, of the hives whence night feeds full on
           the springtide's breath,
       Fills fuller the lips of the lustrous air with delight in the
           dawn:
     Each blossom enkindling with love that is life and subsides with a
           smile into death
       Arises and lightens and sets as a star from her sphere withdrawn.
     Not sleep, in the rapture of radiant dreams, when sundawn smiles on
           the night,
       Shows earth so sweet with a splendour and fragrance of life that
           is love:
     Each blade of the glad live grass, each bud that receives or
           rejects the light,
       Salutes and responds to the marvel of Maytime around and above.

     Joy gives thanks for the sight and the savour of heaven, and is
           humbled
       With awe that exults in thanksgiving: the towers of the flowers
           of the trees
     Shine sweeter than snows that the hand of the season has melted and
           crumbled,
       And fair as the foam that is lesser of life than the loveliest of
           these.
     But the sense of a life more lustrous with joy and enkindled of
           glory
       Than man's was ever or may be, and briefer than joys most brief,
     Bids man's heart bend and adore, be the man's head golden or hoary,
       As it leapt but a breath's time since and saluted the flower and
           the leaf.
     The rapture that springs into love at the sight of the world's
           exultation
       Takes not a sense of rebuke from the sense of triumphant awe:
     But the spirit that quickens the body fulfils it with mute
           adoration,
       And the knees would fain bow down as the eyes that rejoiced and
           saw.


     II

     Fair and sublime as the face of the dawn is the splendour of May,
     But the sky's and the sea's joy fades not as earth's pride passes
           away.
     Yet hardly the sun's first lightning or laughter of love on the sea
     So humbles the heart into worship that knows not or doubts if it be
     As the first full glory beholden again of the life new-born
     That hails and applauds with inaudible music the season of morn.
     A day's length since, and it was not: a night's length more, and
           the sun
     Salutes and enkindles a world of delight as a strange world won.
     A new life answers and thrills to the kiss of the young strong
           year,
     And the glory we see is as music we hear not, and dream that we
           hear.
     From blossom to blossom the live tune kindles, from tree to tree,
     And we know not indeed if we hear not the song of the life we see.

     For the first blithe day that beholds it and worships and cherishes
           cannot but sing
       With a louder and lustier delight in the sun and the sunlit earth
     Than the joy of the days that beheld but the soft green dawn of the
           slow faint spring
       Glad and afraid to be glad, and subdued in a shamefast mirth.
     When the first bright knoll of the woodland world laughs out into
           fragrant light,
       The year's heart changes and quickens with sense of delight in
           desire,
     And the kindling desire is one with thanksgiving for utter fruition
           of sight,
       For sight and for sense of a world that the sun finds meet for
           his lyre.
     Music made of the morning that smites from the chords of the mute
           world song
       Trembles and quickens and lightens, unfelt, unbeholden, unheard,
     From blossom on blossom that climbs and exults in the strength of
           the sun grown strong,
       And answers the word of the wind of the spring with the sun's own
           word.

     Hard on the skirt of the deep soft copses that spring refashions,
       Triumphs and towers to the height of the crown of a wildwood tree
     One royal hawthorn, sublime and serene as the joy that impassions
       Awe that exults in thanksgiving for sight of the grace we see,
     The grace that is given of a god that abides for a season,
           mysterious
       And merciful, fervent and fugitive, seen and unknown and adored:
     His presence is felt in the light and the fragrance, elate and
           imperious,
       His laugh and his breath in the blossom are love's, the beloved
           soul's lord.
     For surely the soul if it loves is beloved of the god as a lover
       Whose love is not all unaccepted, a worship not utterly vain:
     So full, so deep is the joy that revives for the soul to recover
       Yearly, beholden of hope and of memory in sunshine and rain.


     III

     Wonder and love stand silent, stricken at heart and stilled.
     But yet is the cup of delight and of worship unpledged and
           unfilled.
     A handsbreadth hence leaps up, laughs out as an angel crowned,
     A strong full fountain of flowers overflowing above and around.
     The boughs and the blossoms in triumph salute with adoring mirth
     The womb that bare them, the glad green mother, the sunbright
           earth.
     Downward sweeping, as song subsides into silence, none
     May hear what sound is the word's they speak to the brooding sun.
     None that hearken may hear: man may but pass and adore,
     And humble his heart in thanksgiving for joy that is now no more.
     And sudden, afront and ahead of him, joy is alive and aflame
     On the shrine whose incense is given of the godhead, again the
           same.

     Pale and pure as a maiden secluded in secret and cherished with
           fear,
       One sweet glad hawthorn smiles as it shrinks under shelter,
           screened
     By two strong brethren whose bounteous blossom outsoars it, year
           after year,
       While earth still cleaves to the live spring's breast as a babe
           unweaned.
     Never was amaranth fairer in fields where heroes of old found rest,
       Never was asphodel sweeter: but here they endure not long,
     Though ever the sight that salutes them again and adores them
           awhile is blest,
       And the heart is a hymn, and the sense is a soul, and the soul is
           a song.
     Alone on a dyke's trenched edge, and afar from the blossoming
           wildwood's verge,
       Laughs and lightens a sister, triumphal in love-lit pride;
     Clothed round with the sun, and inviolate: her blossoms exult as
           the springtide surge,
       When the wind and the dawn enkindle the snows of the shoreward
           tide.

     Hardly the worship of old that rejoiced as it knelt in the vision
       Shown of the God new-born whose breath is the spirit of spring
     Hailed ever with love more strong and defiant of death's derision
       A joy more perfect than here we mourn for as May takes wing.
     Time gives it and takes it again and restores it: the glory, the
           wonder,
       The triumph of lustrous blossom that makes of the steep sweet
           bank
     One visible marvel of music inaudible, over and under,
       Attuned as in heaven, pass hence and return for the sun to thank.
     The stars and the sun give thanks for the glory bestowed and
           beholden,
       For the gladness they give and rejoice in, the night and the dawn
           and the day:
     But nought they behold when the world is aflower and the season is
           golden
       Makes answer as meet and as sweet as the flower that itself is
           May.




     THE PASSING OF THE HAWTHORN


     The coming of the hawthorn brings on earth
       Heaven: all the spring speaks out in one sweet word,
       And heaven grows gladder, knowing that earth has heard.
     Ere half the flowers are jubilant in birth,
     The splendour of the laughter of their mirth
       Dazzles delight with wonder: man and bird
       Rejoice and worship, stilled at heart and stirred
     With rapture girt about with awe for girth.

     The passing of the hawthorn takes away
       Heaven: all the spring falls dumb, and all the soul
     Sinks down in man for sorrow. Night and day
       Forego the joy that made them one and whole.
     The change that falls on every starry spray
       Bids, flower by flower, the knell of springtime toll.




     TO A BABY KINSWOMAN


     Love, whose light thrills heaven and earth,
     Smiles and weeps upon thy birth,
     Child, whose mother's love-lit eyes
     Watch thee but from Paradise.
     Sweetest sight that earth can give,
     Sweetest light of eyes that live,
     Ours must needs, for hope withdrawn,
     Hail with tears thy soft spring dawn.
     Light of hope whose star hath set,
     Light of love whose sun lives yet,
     Holier, happier, heavenlier love
     Breathes about thee, burns above,
     Surely, sweet, than ours can be,
     Shed from eyes we may not see,
     Though thine own may see them shine
     Night and day, perchance, on thine.
     Sun and moon that lighten earth
     Seem not fit to bless thy birth:
     Scarce the very stars we know
     Here seem bright enough to show
     Whence in unimagined skies
     Glows the vigil of such eyes.
     Theirs whose heart is as a sea
     Swoln with sorrowing love of thee
     Fain would share with thine the sight
     Seen alone of babes aright,
     Watched of eyes more sweet than flowers
     Sleeping or awake: but ours
     Can but deem or dream or guess
     Thee not wholly motherless.
     Might they see or might they know
     What nor faith nor hope may show,
     We whose hearts yearn toward thee now
     Then were blest and wise as thou.
     Had we half thy knowledge,--had
     Love such wisdom,--grief were glad,
     Surely, lit by grace of thee;
     Life were sweet as death may be.
     Now the law that lies on men
     Bids us mourn our dead: but then
     Heaven and life and earth and death,
     Quickened as by God's own breath,
     All were turned from sorrow and strife:
     Earth and death were heaven and life.
     All too far are then and now
     Sundered: none may be as thou.
     Yet this grace is ours--a sign
     Of that goodlier grace of thine,
     Sweet, and thine alone--to see
     Heaven, and heaven's own love, in thee.
     Bless them, then, whose eyes caress
     Thee, as only thou canst bless.
     Comfort, faith, assurance, love,
     Shine around us, brood above,
     Fear grows hope, and hope grows wise,
     Thrilled and lit by children's eyes.
     Yet in ours the tears unshed,
     Child, for hope that death leaves dead,
     Needs must burn and tremble; thou
     Knowest not, seest not, why nor how,
     More than we know whence or why
     Comes on babes that laugh and lie
     Half asleep, in sweet-lipped scorn,
     Light of smiles outlightening morn,
     Whence enkindled as is earth
     By the dawn's less radiant birth
     All the body soft and sweet
     Smiles on us from face to feet
     When the rose-red hands would fain
     Reach the rose-red feet in vain.
     Eyes and hands that worship thee
     Watch and tend, adore and see
     All these heavenly sights, and give
     Thanks to see and love and live.
     Yet, of all that hold thee dear,
     Sweet, the dearest smiles not here.
     Thine alone is now the grace,
     Haply, still to see her face;
     Thine, thine only now the sight
     Whence we dream thine own takes light.
     Yet, though faith and hope live blind,
     Yet they live in heart and mind
     Strong and keen as truth may be:
     Yet, though blind as grief were we
     Inly for a weeping-while,
     Sorrow's self before thy smile
     Smiles and softens, knowing that yet,
     Far from us though heaven be set,
     Love, bowed down for thee to bless,
     Dares not call thee motherless.

     _May 1894._




     THE ALTAR OF RIGHTEOUSNESS


     +es to pan de soi legô,+
     +bômon aidesai dikas;+
     +mêde nin+
     +kerdos idôn atheô podi lax atisês;+
     +poina gar epestai.+
     +kyrion menei telos.+

                   ÆSCH. _Eum._ 538-544

     +para to phôs idein.+

                   ÆSCH. _Cho._ 972




     THE ALTAR OF RIGHTEOUSNESS


     I

       Light and night, whose clouds and glories change and mingle and
           divide,
       Veil the truth whereof they witness, show the truth of things
           they hide.
       Through the darkness and the splendour of the centuries, loud or
           dumb,
       Shines and wanes and shines the spirit, lit with love of life to
           come.
       Man, the soul made flesh, that knows not death from life, and
           fain would know,
       Sees the face of time change colour as its tides recoil and flow.
       All his hope and fear and faith and doubt, if aught at all they
           be,
       Live the life of clouds and sunbeams, born of heaven or earth or
           sea.
       All are buoyed and blown and brightened by their hour's evasive
           breath:
       All subside and quail and darken when their hour is done to
           death.
       Yet, ere faith, a wandering water, froze and curdled into creeds,
       Earth, elate as heaven, adored the light that quickens dreams to
           deeds.

     Invisible: eye hath not seen it, and ear hath not heard as the
           spirit hath heard
     From the shrine that is lit not of sunlight or starlight the sound
           of a limitless word.
     And visible: none that hath eyes to behold what the spirit must
           perish or see
     Can choose but behold it and worship: a shrine that if light were
           as darkness would be.
     Of cloud and of change is the form of the fashion that man may
           behold of it wrought:
     Of iron and truth is the mystic mid altar, where worship is none
           but of thought.
     No prayer may go up to it, climbing as incense of gladness or
           sorrow may climb:
     No rapture of music may ruffle the silence that guards it, and
           hears not of time.
     As the winds of the wild blind ages alternate in passion of light
           and of cloud,
     So changes the shape of the veil that enshrouds it with darkness
           and light for a shroud.
     And the winds and the clouds and the suns fall silent, and fade out
           of hearing or sight,
     And the shrine stands fast and is changed not, whose likeness was
           changed as a cloud in the night.

       All the storms of time, and wrath of many winds, may carve no
           trace
       On the viewless altar, though the veil bear many a name and face:
       Many a live God's likeness woven, many a scripture dark with awe,
       Bids the veil seem verier iron than the word of life's own law.
       Till the might of change hath rent it with a rushing wind in
           twain,
       Stone or steel it seems, whereon the wrath of chance is wreaked
           in vain:
       Stone or steel, and all behind it or beyond its lifted sign
       Cloud and vapour, no subsistence of a change-unstricken shrine.
       God by god flits past in thunder, till his glories turn to
           shades:
       God to god bears wondering witness how his gospel flames and
           fades.
       More was each of these, while yet they were, than man their
           servant seemed:
       Dead are all of these, and man survives who made them while he
           dreamed.

     Yet haply or surely, if vision were surer than theirs who rejoiced
           that they saw,
     Man might not but see, through the darkness of godhead, the light
           that is surety and law.
     On the stone that the close-drawn cloud which veils it awhile makes
           cloudlike stands
     The word of the truth everlasting, unspoken of tongues and
           unwritten of hands.
     By the sunbeams and storms of the centuries engraven, and approved
           of the soul as it reads,
     It endures as a token dividing the light from the darkness of
           dreams and of deeds.
     The faces of gods on the face of it carven, or gleaming behind and
           above,
     Star-glorified Uranus, thunderous Jehovah, for terror or worship or
           love,
     Change, wither, and brighten as flowers that the wind of eternity
           sheds upon time,
     All radiant and transient and awful and mortal, and leave it
           unmarred and sublime.
     As the tides that return and recede are the fears and the hopes of
           the centuries that roll,
     Requenched and rekindled: but strong as the sun is the sense of it
           shrined in the soul.


     II

     In the days when time was not, in the time when days were none,
     Ere sorrow had life to lot, ere earth gave thanks for the sun,
     Ere man in his darkness waking adored what the soul in him could,
     And the manifold God of his making was manifest evil and good,
     One law from the dim beginning abode and abides in the end,
     In sight of him sorrowing and sinning with none but his faith for
           friend.
     Dark were the shadows around him, and darker the glories above,
     Ere light from beyond them found him, and bade him for love's sake
           love.
     About him was darkness, and under and over him darkness: the night
     That conceived him and bore him had thunder for utterance and
           lightning for light.
     The dust of death was the dust of the ways that the tribes of him
           trod:
     And he knew not if just or unjust were the might of the mystery of
           God.
     Strange horror and hope, strange faith and unfaith, were his boon
           and his bane:
     And the God of his trust was the wraith of the soul or the ghost of
           it slain.
     A curse was on death as on birth, and a Presence that shone as a
           sword
     Shed menace from heaven upon earth that beheld him, and hailed him
           her Lord.
     Sublime and triumphant as fire or as lightning, he kindled the
           skies,
     And withered with dread the desire that would look on the light of
           his eyes.
     Earth shuddered with worship, and knew not if hell were not hot in
           her breath;
     If birth were not sin, and the dew of the morning the sweat of her
           death.
     The watchwords of evil and good were unspoken of men and unheard:
     They were shadows that willed as he would, that were made and
           unmade by his word.
     His word was darkness and light, and a wisdom that makes men mad
     Sent blindness upon them for sight, that they saw but and heard as
           he bade.
     Cast forth and corrupt from the birth by the crime of creation,
           they stood
     Convicted of evil on earth by the grace of a God found good.
     The grace that enkindled and quickened the darkness of hell with
           flame
     Bade man, though the soul in him sickened, obey, and give praise to
           his name.
     The still small voice of the spirit whose life is as plague's hot
           breath
     Bade man shed blood, and inherit the life of the kingdom of death.

     "Bring now for blood-offering thy son to mine altar, and bind him
           and slay,
     That the sin of my bidding be done": and the soul in the slave
           said, "Yea."
     Yea, not nay, was the word: and the sacrifice offered withal
     Was neither of beast nor of bird, but the soul of a man, God's
           thrall.
     And the word of his servant spoken was fire, and the light of a
           sword,
     When the bondage of Israel was broken, and Sinai shrank from the
           Lord.
     With splendour of slaughter and thunder of song as the sound of the
           sea
     Were the foes of him stricken in sunder and silenced as storms that
           flee.
     Terror and trust and the pride of the chosen, approved of his
           choice,
     Saw God in the whirlwind ride, and rejoiced as the winds rejoice.
     Subdued and exalted and kindled and quenched by the sense of his
           might,
     Faith flamed and exulted and dwindled, and saw not, and clung to
           the sight.
     The wastes of the wilderness brightened and trembled with rapture
           and dread
     When the word of him thundered and lightened and spake through the
           quick and the dead.
     The chant of the prophetess, louder and loftier than tempest and
           wave,
     Rang triumph more ruthless and prouder than death, and profound as
           the grave.
     And sweet as the moon's word spoken in smiles that the blown clouds
           mar
     The psalmist's witness in token arose as the speech of a star.
     Starlight supreme, and the tender desire of the moon, were as one
     To rebuke with compassion the splendour and strength of the godlike
          sun.
     God softened and changed: and the word of his chosen, a fire at the
          first,
     Bade man, as a beast or a bird, now slake at the springs his
          thirst.
     The souls that were sealed unto death as the bones of the dead lie
          sealed
     Rose thrilled and redeemed by the breath of the dawn on the
          flame-lit field.
     The glories of darkness, cloven with music of thunder, shrank
     As the web of the word was unwoven that spake, and the soul's tide
          sank.
     And the starshine of midnight that covered Arabia with light as a
          robe
     Waxed fiery with utterance that hovered and flamed through the
          whirlwind on Job.
     And prophet to prophet and vision to vision made answer sublime,
     Till the valley of doom and decision was merged in the tides of
          time.


     III

           Then, soft as the dews of night,
           As the star of the sundawn bright,
             As the heart of the sea's hymn deep,
             And sweet as the balm of sleep,
           Arose on the world a light
             Too pure for the skies to keep.

     With music sweeter and stranger than heaven had heard
     When the dark east thrilled with light from a saviour's word
     And a God grew man to endure as a man and abide
     The doom of the will of the Lord of the loud world's tide,
     Whom thunders utter, and tempest and darkness hide,
     With larger light than flamed from the peak whereon
     Prometheus, bound as the sun to the world's wheel, shone,
     A presence passed and abode but on earth a span,
     And love's own light as a river before him ran,
     And the name of God for awhile upon earth was man.

     O star that wast not and wast for the world a sun,
     O light that was quenched of priests, and its work undone,
     O Word that wast not as man's or as God's, if God
     Be Lord but of hosts whose tread was as death's that trod
     On souls that felt but his wrath as an unseen rod,
     What word, what praise, what passion of hopeless prayer,
     May now rise up to thee, loud as in years that were,
     From years that gaze on the works of thy servants wrought
     While strength was in them to satiate the lust of thought
     That craved in thy name for blood as the quest it sought?

           From the dark high places of Rome
           Far over the westward foam
             God's heaven and the sun saw swell
             The fires of the high priest's hell,
           And shrank as they curled and clomb
             And revelled and ravaged and fell.


     IV

     Yet was not the work of thy word all withered with wasting flame
     By the sons of the priests that had slain thee, whose evil was
           wrought in thy name.
     From the blood-sodden soil that was blasted with fires of the
           Church and her creed
     Sprang rarely but surely, by grace of thy spirit, a flower for a
           weed.
     Thy spirit, unfelt of thy priests who blasphemed thee, enthralled
           and enticed
     To deathward a child that was even as the child we behold in
           Christ.
     The Moors, they told her, beyond bright Spain and the strait brief
           sea,
     Dwelt blind in the light that for them was as darkness, and knew
           not thee.
     But the blood of the martyrs whose mission was witness for God,
           they said,
     Might raise to redemption the souls that were here, in the sun's
           sight, dead.
     And the child rose up in the night, when the stars were as friends
           that smiled,
     And sought her brother, and wakened the younger and tenderer child.
     From the heaven of a child's glad sleep to the heaven of the sight
           of her eyes
     He woke, and brightened and hearkened, and kindled as stars that
           rise.
     And forth they fared together to die for the stranger's sake,
     For the souls of the slayers that should slay them, and turn from
           their sins, and wake.
     And the light of the love that lit them awhile on a brief blind
           quest
     Shines yet on the tear-lit smile that salutes them, belated and
           blest.

     And the girl, full-grown to the stature of godhead in womanhood,
           spake
     The word that sweetens and lightens her creed for her great love's
           sake.
     From the godlike heart of Theresa the prayer above all prayers
           heard,
     The cry as of God made woman, a sweet blind wonderful word,
     Sprang sudden as flame, and kindled the darkness of faith with
           love,
     And the hollow of hell from beneath shone, quickened of heaven from
           above.
     Yea, hell at her word grew heaven, as she prayed that if God
           thought well
     She there might stand in the gateway, that none might pass into
           hell.
     Not Hermes, guardian and guide, God, herald, and comforter, shed
     Such lustre of hope from the life of his light on the night of the
           dead.
     Not Pallas, wiser and mightier in mercy than Rome's God shone,
     Wore ever such raiment of love as the soul of a saint put on.
     So blooms as a flower of the darkness a star of the midnight born,
     Of the midnight's womb and the blackness of darkness, and flames
           like morn.
     Nor yet may the dawn extinguish or hide it, when churches and
           creeds
     Are withered and blasted with sunlight as poisonous and blossomless
           weeds.
     So springs and strives through the soil that the legions of
           darkness have trod,
     From the root that is man, from the soul in the body, the flower
           that is God.


     V

               Ages and creeds that drift
               Through change and cloud uplift
         The soul that soars and seeks her sovereign shrine,
               Her faith's veiled altar, there
               To find, when praise and prayer
         Fall baffled, if the darkness be divine.
           Lights change and shift through star and sun:
     Night, clothed with might of immemorial years, is one.

               Day, born and slain of night,
               Hath hardly life in sight
         As she that bears and slays him and survives,
               And gives us back for one
               Cloud-thwarted fiery sun
         The myriad mysteries of the lambent lives
           Whose starry soundless music saith
     That light and life wax perfect even through night and death.

               In vain had darkness heard
               Light speak the lustrous word
         That cast out faith in all save truth and love:
               In vain death's quickening rod
               Bade man rise up as God,
         Touched as with life unknown in heaven above:
           Fear turned his light of love to fire
     That wasted earth, yet might not slay the soul's desire.

               Though death seem life, and night
               Bid fear call darkness light,
         Time, faith, and hope keep trust, through sorrow and shame,
               Till Christ, by Paul cast out,
               Return, and all the rout
         Of raging slaves whose prayer defiles his name
           Rush headlong to the deep, and die,
     And leave no sign to say that faith once heard them lie.


     VI

     Since man, with a child's pride proud, and abashed as a child and
           afraid,
     Made God in his likeness, and bowed him to worship the Maker he
           made,
     No faith more dire hath enticed man's trust than the saint's whose
           creed
     Made Caiaphas one with Christ, that worms on the cross might feed.
     Priests gazed upon God in the eyes of a babe new-born, and therein
     Beheld not heaven, and the wise glad secret of love, but sin.
     Accursed of heaven, and baptized with the baptism of hatred and
           hell,
     They spat on the name they despised and adored as a sign and a
           spell.
     "Lord Christ, thou art God, and a liar: they were children of
           wrath, not of grace,
     Unbaptized, unredeemed from the fire they were born for, who smiled
           in thy face."
     Of such is the kingdom--he said it--of heaven: and the heavenly
           word
     Shall live when religion is dead, and when falsehood is dumb shall
           be heard.
     And the message of James and of John was as Christ's and as love's
           own call:
     But wrath passed sentence thereon when Annas replied in Paul.
     The dark old God who had slain him grew one with the Christ he
           slew,
     And poison was rank in the grain that with growth of his gospel
           grew.
     And the blackness of darkness brightened: and red in the heart of
           the flame
     Shone down, as a blessing that lightened, the curse of a new God's
           name.
     Through centuries of burning and trembling belief as a signal it
           shone,
     Till man, soul-sick of dissembling, bade fear and her frauds
           begone.
     God Cerberus yelps from his throats triune: but his day, which was
           night,
     Is quenched, with its stars and the notes of its night-birds, in
           silence and light.
     The flames of its fires and the psalms of their psalmists are
           darkened and dumb:
     Strong winter has withered the palms of his angels, and stricken
           them numb.
     God, father of lies, God, son of perdition, God, spirit of ill,
     Thy will that for ages was done is undone as a dead God's will.
     Not Mahomet's sword could slay thee, nor Borgia's or Calvin's
           praise:
     But the scales of the spirit that weigh thee are weighted with
           truth, and it slays.
     The song of the day of thy fury, when nature and death shall quail,
     Rings now as the thunders of Jewry, the ghost of a dead world's
           tale.
     That day and its doom foreseen and foreshadowed on earth, when
           thou,
     Lord God, wast lord of the keen dark season, are sport for us now.
     Thy claws were clipped and thy fangs plucked out by the hands that
           slew
     Men, lovers of man, whose pangs bore witness if truth were true.
     Man crucified rose again from the sepulchre builded to be
     No grave for the souls of the men who denied thee, but, Lord, for
           thee.

     When Bruno's spirit aspired from the flames that thy servants fed,
     The spirit of faith was fired to consume thee and leave thee dead.
     When the light of the sunlike eyes whence laughter lightened and
           flamed
     Bade France and the world be wise, faith saw thee naked and shamed.
     When wisdom deeper and sweeter than Rabelais veiled and revealed
     Found utterance diviner and meeter for truth whence anguish is
           healed,
     Whence fear and hate and belief in thee, fed by thy grace from
           above,
     Fall stricken, and utmost grief takes light from the lustre of
           love,
     When Shakespeare shone into birth, and the world he beheld grew
           bright,
     Thy kingdom was ended on earth, and the darkness it shed was light.
     In him all truth and the glory thereof and the power and the pride,
     The song of the soul and her story, bore witness that fear had
           lied.
     All hope, all wonder, all trust, all doubt that knows not of fear,
     The love of the body, the lust of the spirit to see and to hear,
     All womanhood, fairer than love could conceive or desire or adore,
     All manhood, radiant above all heights that it held of yore,
     Lived by the life of his breath, with the speech of his soul's will
           spake,
     And the light lit darkness to death whence never the dead shall
           wake.
     For the light that lived in the sound of the song of his speech was
           one
     With the light of the wisdom that found earth's tune in the song of
           the sun;
     His word with the word of the lord most high of us all on earth,
     Whose soul was a lyre and a sword, whose death was a deathless
           birth.
     Him too we praise as we praise our own who as he stand strong;
     Him, Æschylus, ancient of days, whose word is the perfect song.
     When Caucasus showed to the sun and the sea what a God could
           endure,
     When wisdom and light were one, and the hands of the matricide
           pure,
     A song too subtle for psalmist or prophet of Jewry to know,
     Elate and profound as the calmest or stormiest of waters that flow,
     A word whose echoes were wonder and music of fears overcome,
     Bade Sinai bow, and the thunder of godhead on Horeb be dumb.
     The childless children of night, strong daughters of doom and
           dread,
     The thoughts and the fears that smite the soul, and its life lies
           dead,
     Stood still and were quelled by the sound of his word and the light
           of his thought,
     And the God that in man lay bound was unbound from the bonds he had
           wrought.
     Dark fear of a lord more dark than the dreams of his worshippers
           knew
     Fell dead, and the corpse lay stark in the sunlight of truth shown
           true.


     VII

     Time, and truth his child, though terror set earth and heaven at
           odds,
     See the light of manhood rise on the twilight of the Gods.
     Light is here for souls to see, though the stars of faith be dead:
     All the sea that yearned and trembled receives the sun instead.
     All the shadows on the spirit when fears and dreams were strong,
     All perdition, all redemption, blind rain-stars watched so long,
     Love whose root was fear, thanksgiving that cowered beneath the
           rod,
     Feel the light that heals and withers: night weeps upon her God.
     All the names wherein the incarnate Lord lived his day and died
     Fade from suns to stars, from stars into darkness undescried.

     Christ the man lives yet, remembered of man as dreams that leave
     Light on eyes that wake and know not if memory bid them grieve.
     Fire sublime as lightning shines, and exults in thunder yet,
     Where the battle wields the name and the sword of Mahomet.
     Far above all wars and gospels, all ebb and flow of time,
     Lives the soul that speaks in silence, and makes mute earth
           sublime.
     Still for her, though years and ages be blinded and bedinned,
     Mazed with lightnings, crazed with thunders, life rides and guides
           the wind.
     Death may live or death may die, and the truth be light or night:
     Not for gain of heaven may man put away the rule of right.




     A NEW YEAR'S EVE

     CHRISTINA ROSSETTI DIED DECEMBER 29, 1894


     The stars are strong in the deeps of the lustrous night,
     Cold and splendid as death if his dawn be bright;
       Cold as the cast-off garb that is cold as clay,
     Splendid and strong as a spirit intense as light.

     A soul more sweet than the morning of new-born May
     Has passed with the year that has passed from the world away.
       A song more sweet than the morning's first-born song
     Again will hymn not among us a new year's day.

     Not here, not here shall the carol of joy grown strong
     Ring rapture now, and uplift us, a spell-struck throng,
       From dream to vision of life that the soul may see
     By death's grace only, if death do its trust no wrong.

     Scarce yet the days and the starry nights are three
     Since here among us a spirit abode as we,
       Girt round with life that is fettered in bonds of time,
     And clasped with darkness about as is earth with sea.

     And now, more high than the vision of souls may climb,
     The soul whose song was as music of stars that chime,
       Clothed round with life as of dawn and the mounting sun,
     Sings, and we know not here of the song sublime.

     No word is ours of it now that the songs are done
     Whence here we drank of delight as in freedom won,
       In deep deliverance given from the bonds we bore.
     There is none to sing as she sang upon earth, not one.

     We heard awhile: and for us who shall hear no more
     The sound as of waves of light on a starry shore
       Awhile bade brighten and yearn as a father's face
     The face of death, divine as in days of yore.

     The grey gloom quickened and quivered: the sunless place
     Thrilled, and the silence deeper than time or space
       Seemed now not all everlasting. Hope grew strong,
     And love took comfort, given of the sweet song's grace.

     Love that finds not on earth, where it finds but wrong,
     Love that bears not the bondage of years in throng
       Shone to show for her, higher than the years that mar,
     The life she looked and longed for as love must long.

     Who knows? We know not. Afar, if the dead be far,
     Alive, if the dead be alive as the soul's works are,
       The soul whose breath was among us a heavenward song
     Sings, loves, and shines as it shines for us here a star.




     IN A ROSARY


     Through the low grey archway children's feet that pass
     Quicken, glad to find the sweetest haunt of all.
     Brightest wildflowers gleaming deep in lustiest grass,
     Glorious weeds that glisten through the green sea's glass,
     Match not now this marvel, born to fade and fall.

     Roses like a rainbow wrought of roses rise
     Right and left and forward, shining toward the sun.
     Nay, the rainbow lit of sunshine droops and dies
     Ere we dream it hallows earth and seas and skies;
     Ere delight may dream it lives, its life is done.

     Round the border hemmed with high deep hedges round
     Go the children, peering over or between
     Where the dense bright oval wall of box inwound,
     Reared about the roses fast within it bound,
     Gives them grace to glance at glories else unseen.

     Flower outlightening flower and tree outflowering tree
     Feed and fill the sense and spirit full with joy.
     Nought awhile they know of outer earth and sea:
     Here enough of joy it is to breathe and be:
     Here the sense of life is one for girl and boy.

     Heaven above them, bright as children's eyes or dreams,
     Earth about them, sweet as glad soft sleep can show
     Earth and sky and sea, a world that scarcely seems
     Even in children's eyes less fair than life that gleams
     Through the sleep that none but sinless eyes may know.

     Near beneath, and near above, the terraced ways
     Wind or stretch and bask or blink against the sun.
     Hidden here from sight on soft or stormy days
     Lies and laughs with love toward heaven, at silent gaze,
     All the radiant rosary--all its flowers made one.

     All the multitude of roses towering round
     Dawn and noon and night behold as one full flower,
     Fain of heaven and loved of heaven, curbed and crowned,
     Raised and reared to make this plot of earthly ground
     Heavenly, could but heaven endure on earth an hour.

     Swept away, made nothing now for ever, dead,
     Still the rosary lives and shines on memory, free
     Now from fear of death or change as childhood, fled
     Years on years before its last live leaves were shed:
     None may mar it now, as none may stain the sea.




     THE HIGH OAKS

     BARKING HALL, JULY 19TH, 1896


             Fourscore years and seven
             Light and dew from heaven
       Have fallen with dawn on these glad woods each day
             Since here was born, even here,
             A birth more bright and dear
             Than ever a younger year
       Hath seen or shall till all these pass away,
         Even all the imperious pride of these,
     The woodland ways majestic now with towers of trees.

             Love itself hath nought
             Touched of tenderest thought
       With holiest hallowing of memorial grace
             For memory, blind with bliss,
             To love, to clasp, to kiss,
             So sweetly strange as this,
       The sense that here the sun first hailed her face,
         A babe at Her glad mother's breast,
     And here again beholds it more beloved and blest.

             Love's own heart, a living
             Spring of strong thanksgiving,
       Can bid no strength of welling song find way
             When all the soul would seek
             One word for joy to speak,
             And even its strength makes weak
       The too strong yearning of the soul to say
         What may not be conceived or said
     While darkness makes division of the quick and dead.

             Haply, where the sun
             Wanes, and death is none,
       The word known here of silence only, held
             Too dear for speech to wrong,
             May leap in living song
             Forth, and the speech be strong
       As here the silence whence it yearned and welled
         From hearts whose utterance love sealed fast
     Till death perchance might give it grace to live at last.

             Here we have our earth
             Yet, with all the mirth
       Of all the summers since the world began,
             All strengths of rest and strife
             And love-lit love of life
             Where death has birth to wife,
       And where the sun speaks, and is heard of man:
         Yea, half the sun's bright speech is heard,
     And like the sea the soul of man gives back his word.

             Earth's enkindled heart
             Bears benignant part
       In the ardent heaven's auroral pride of prime:
             If ever home on earth
             Were found of heaven's grace worth
             So God-beloved a birth
       As here makes bright the fostering face of time,
         Here, heaven bears witness, might such grace
     Fall fragrant as the dewfall on that brightening face.

             Here, for mine and me,
             All that eyes may see
       Hath more than all the wide world else of good,
             All nature else of fair:
             Here as none otherwhere
             Heaven is the circling air,
       Heaven is the homestead, heaven the wold, the wood:
         The fragrance with the shadow spread
     From broadening wings of cedars breathes of dawn's bright bed.

             Once a dawn rose here
             More divine and dear,
       Rose on a birth-bed brighter far than dawn's,
             Whence all the summer grew
             Sweet as when earth was new
             And pure as Eden's dew:
       And yet its light lives on these lustrous lawns,
         Clings round these wildwood ways, and cleaves
     To the aisles of shadow and sun that wind unweaves and weaves.

             Thoughts that smile and weep,
             Dreams that hallow sleep,
       Brood in the branching shadows of the trees,
             Tall trees at agelong rest
             Wherein the centuries nest,
             Whence, blest as these are blest,
       We part, and part not from delight in these;
         Whose comfort, sleeping as awake,
     We bear about within us as when first it spake.

             Comfort as of song
             Grown with time more strong,
       Made perfect and prophetic as the sea,
             Whose message, when it lies
             Far off our hungering eyes,
             Within us prophesies
       Of life not ours, yet ours as theirs may be
         Whose souls far off us shine and sing
     As ere they sprang back sunward, swift as fire might spring.

             All this oldworld pleasance
             Hails a hallowing presence,
       And thrills with sense of more than summer near,
             And lifts toward heaven more high
             The song-surpassing cry
             Of rapture that July
       Lives, for her love who makes it loveliest here;
         For joy that she who here first drew
     The breath of life she gave me breathes it here anew.

             Never birthday born
             Highest in height of morn
       Whereout the star looks forth that leads the sun
             Shone higher in love's account,
             Still seeing the mid noon mount
             From the eager dayspring's fount
       Each year more lustrous, each like all in one;
         Whose light around us and above
     We could not see so lovely save by grace of love.




     BARKING HALL: A YEAR AFTER


             Still the sovereign trees
             Make the sundawn's breeze
       More bright, more sweet, more heavenly than it rose,
             As wind and sun fulfil
             Their living rapture: still
             Noon, dawn, and evening thrill
       With radiant change the immeasurable repose
         Wherewith the woodland wilds lie blest
     And feel how storms and centuries rock them still to rest.

             Still the love-lit place
             Given of God such grace
       That here was born on earth a birth divine
             Gives thanks with all its flowers
             Through all their lustrous hours,
             From all its birds and bowers
       Gives thanks that here they felt her sunset shine
         Where once her sunrise laughed, and bade
     The life of all the living things it lit be glad.

             Soft as light and strong
             Rises yet their song
       And thrills with pride the cedar-crested lawn
             And every brooding dove.
             But she, beloved above
             All utterance known of love,
       Abides no more the change of night and dawn,
         Beholds no more with earth-born eye
     These woods that watched her waking here where all things die.

             Not the light that shone
             When she looked thereon
       Shines on them or shall shine for ever here.
             We know not, save when sleep
             Slays death, who fain would keep
             His mystery dense and deep,
       Where shines the smile we held and hold so dear.
         Dreams only, thrilled and filled with love,
     Bring back its light ere dawn leave nought alive above.

             Nought alive awake
             Sees the strong dawn break
       On all the dreams that dying night bade live.
             Yet scarce the intolerant sense
             Of day's harsh evidence
             How came their word and whence
       Strikes dumb the song of thanks it bids them give,
         The joy that answers as it heard
     And lightens as it saw the light that spake the word.

             Night and sleep and dawn
             Pass with dreams withdrawn:
       But higher above them far than noon may climb
             Love lives and turns to light
             The deadly noon of night.
             His fiery spirit of sight
       Endures no curb of change or darkling time.
         Even earth and transient things of earth
     Even here to him bear witness not of death but birth.




     MUSIC: AN ODE


     I

       Was it light that spake from the darkness, or music that shone
           from the word,
       When the night was enkindled with sound of the sun or the
           first-born bird?
     Souls enthralled and entrammelled in bondage of seasons that fall
           and rise,
     Bound fast round with the fetters of flesh, and blinded with light
           that dies,
     Lived not surely till music spake, and the spirit of life was
           heard.


     II

       Music, sister of sunrise, and herald of life to be,
       Smiled as dawn on the spirit of man, and the thrall was free.
     Slave of nature and serf of time, the bondman of life and death,
     Dumb with passionless patience that breathed but forlorn and
           reluctant breath,
     Heard, beheld, and his soul made answer, and communed aloud with
           the sea.


     III

       Morning spake, and he heard: and the passionate silent noon
       Kept for him not silence: and soft from the mounting moon
     Fell the sound of her splendour, heard as dawn's in the breathless
           night,
     Not of men but of birds whose note bade man's soul quicken and leap
           to light:
     And the song of it spake, and the light and the darkness of earth
           were as chords in tune.




     THE CENTENARY OF THE BATTLE OF THE NILE

     AUGUST 1898

     '_Horatio Nelson_--_Honor est a Nilo_'


     A hundred years have lightened and have waned
     Since ancient Nile by grace of Nelson gained
       A glory higher in story now than time
     Saw when his kings were gods that raged and reigned.

     The day that left even England more sublime
     And higher on heights that none but she may climb
       Abides above all shock of change-born chance
     Where hope and memory hear the stars keep chime.

     The strong and sunbright lie whose name was France
     Arose against the sun of truth, whose glance
       Laughed large from the eyes of England, fierce as fire
     Whence eyes wax blind that gaze on truth askance.

     A name above all names of heroes, higher
     Than song may sound or heart of man aspire,
       Rings as the very voice that speaks the sea
     To-day from all the sea's enkindling lyre.

     The sound that bids the soul of silence be
     Fire, and a rapturous music, speaks, and we
       Hear what the sea's heart utters, wide and far:
     "This was his day, and this day's light was he."

     O sea, our sea that hadst him for thy star,
     A hundred years that fall upon thee are
       Even as a hundred flakes of rain or snow:
     No storm of battle signs thee with a scar.

     But never more may ship that sails thee show,
     But never may the sun that loves thee know,
       But never may thine England give thee more,
     A man whose life and death shall praise thee so.

     The Nile, the sea, the battle, and the shore,
     Heard as we hear one word arise and soar,
       Beheld one name above them tower and glow--
     Nelson: a light that time bows down before.




     TRAFALGAR DAY


     Sea, that art ours as we are thine, whose name
     Is one with England's even as light with flame,
       Dost thou as we, thy chosen of all men, know
     This day of days when death gave life to fame?

     Dost thou not kindle above and thrill below
     With rapturous record, with memorial glow,
       Remembering this thy festal day of fight,
     And all the joy it gave, and all the woe?

     Never since day broke flowerlike forth of night
     Broke such a dawn of battle. Death in sight
       Made of the man whose life was like the sun
     A man more godlike than the lord of light.

     There is none like him, and there shall be none.
     When England bears again as great a son,
       He can but follow fame where Nelson led.
     There is not and there cannot be but one.

     As earth has but one England, crown and head
     Of all her glories till the sun be dead,
       Supreme in peace and war, supreme in song,
     Supreme in freedom, since her rede was read,

     Since first the soul that gave her speech grew strong
     To help the right and heal the wild world's wrong,
       So she hath but one royal Nelson, born
     To reign on time above the years that throng.

     The music of his name puts fear to scorn,
     And thrills our twilight through with sense of morn:
       As England was, how should not England be?
     No tempest yet has left her banner torn.

     No year has yet put out the day when he
     Who lived and died to keep our kingship free
       Wherever seas by warring winds are worn
     Died, and was one with England and the sea.

     _October 21, 1895._




     CROMWELL'S STATUE[1]


     What needs our Cromwell stone or bronze to say
     His was the light that lit on England's way
       The sundawn of her time-compelling power,
     The noontide of her most imperial day?

     His hand won back the sea for England's dower;
     His footfall bade the Moor change heart and cower;
       His word on Milton's tongue spake law to France
     When Piedmont felt the she-wolf Rome devour.

     From Cromwell's eyes the light of England's glance
     Flashed, and bowed down the kings by grace of chance,
       The priest-anointed princes; one alone
     By grace of England held their hosts in trance.

     The enthroned Republic from her kinglier throne
     Spake, and her speech was Cromwell's. Earth has known
       No lordlier presence. How should Cromwell stand
     With kinglets and with queenlings hewn in stone?

     Incarnate England in his warrior hand
     Smote, and as fire devours the blackening brand
       Made ashes of their strengths who wrought her wrong,
     And turned the strongholds of her foes to sand.

     His praise is in the sea's and Milton's song;
     What praise could reach him from the weakling throng
       That rules by leave of tongues whose praise is shame--
     Him, who made England out of weakness strong?

     There needs no clarion's blast of broad-blown fame
     To bid the world bear witness whence he came
       Who bade fierce Europe fawn at England's heel
     And purged the plague of lineal rule with flame.

     There needs no witness graven on stone or steel
     For one whose work bids fame bow down and kneel;
       Our man of men, whose time-commanding name
     Speaks England, and proclaims her Commonweal.

     _June 20, 1895._


[Footnote 1: Refused by the party of reaction and disunion in the House
of Commons on the 17th of June, 1895.]




     A WORD FOR THE NAVY


     I

     Queen born of the sea, that hast borne her
       The mightiest of seamen on earth,
     Bright England, whose glories adorn her
       And bid her rejoice in thy birth
         As others made mothers
           Rejoice in births sublime,
         She names thee, she claims thee,
           The lordliest child of time.


     II

     All hers is the praise of thy story,
       All thine is the love of her choice
     The light of her waves is thy glory,
       The sound of thy soul is her voice.
         They fear it who hear it
           And love not truth nor thee:
         They sicken, heart-stricken,
           Who see and would not see.


     III

     The lords of thy fate, and thy keepers
       Whose charge is the strength of thy ships,
     If now they be dreamers and sleepers,
       Or sluggards with lies at their lips,
         Thy haters and traitors,
           False friends or foes descried,
         Might scatter and shatter
           Too soon thy princely pride.


     IV

     Dark Muscovy, reptile in rancour,
       Base Germany, blatant in guile,
     Lay wait for thee riding at anchor
       On waters that whisper and smile.
         They deem thee or dream thee
           Less living now than dead,
         Deep sunken and drunken
           With sleep whence fear has fled.


     V

     And what though thy song as thine action
       Wax faint, and thy place be not known,
     While faction is grappling with faction,
       Twin curs with thy corpse for a bone?
         They care not, who spare not
           The noise of pens or throats;
         Who bluster and muster
           Blind ranks and bellowing votes.


     VI

     Let populace jangle with peerage
       And ministers shuffle their mobs;
     Mad pilots who reck not of steerage
       Though tempest ahead of them throbs.
         That throbbing and sobbing
           Of wind and gradual wave
         They hear not and fear not
           Who guide thee toward thy grave.


     VII

     No clamour of cries or of parties
       Is worth but a whisper from thee,
     While only the trust of thy heart is
       At one with the soul of the sea.
         In justice her trust is
           Whose time her tidestreams keep;
         They sink not, they shrink not,
           Time casts them not on sleep.


     VIII

     Sleep thou: for thy past was so royal,
       Love hardly would bid thee take heed
     Were Russia not faithful and loyal
       Nor Germany guiltless of greed.
         No nation, in station
           Of story less than thou,
         Re-risen from prison,
           Can stand against thee now.


     IX

     Sleep on: is the time not a season
       For strong men to slumber and sleep,
     And wise men to palter with treason?
       And that they sow tares, shall they reap?
         The wages of ages
           Wherein men smiled and slept,
         Fame fails them, shame veils them,
           Their record is not kept.


     X

     Nay, whence is it then that we know it,
       What wages were theirs, and what fame?
     Deep voices of prophet and poet
       Bear record against them of shame.
         Death, starker and darker
           Than seals the graveyard grate,
         Entombs them and dooms them
           To darkness deep as fate.


     XI

     But thou, though the world should misdoubt thee,
       Be strong as the seas at thy side;
     Bind on but thine armour about thee,
       That girds thee with power and with pride.
         Where Drake stood, where Blake stood,
           Where fame sees Nelson stand,
         Stand thou too, and now too
           Take thou thy fate in hand.


     XII

     At the gate of the sea, in the gateway,
       They stood as the guards of thy gate;
     Take now but thy strengths to thee straightway,
       Though late, we will deem it not late.
         Thy story, thy glory,
           The very soul of thee,
         It rose not, it grows not,
           It comes not save by sea.




     NORTHUMBERLAND


     Between our eastward and our westward sea
         The narrowing strand
     Clasps close the noblest shore fame holds in fee
     Even here where English birth seals all men free--
         Northumberland.

     The sea-mists meet across it when the snow
         Clothes moor and fell,
     And bid their true-born hearts who love it glow
     For joy that none less nobly born may know
         What love knows well.

     The splendour and the strength of storm and fight
         Sustain the song
     That filled our fathers' hearts with joy to smite,
     To live, to love, to lay down life that right
         Might tread down wrong.

     They warred, they sang, they triumphed, and they passed,
         And left us glad
     Here to be born, their sons, whose hearts hold fast
     The proud old love no change can overcast,
         No chance leave sad.

     None save our northmen ever, none but we,
         Met, pledged, or fought
     Such foes and friends as Scotland and the sea
     With heart so high and equal, strong in glee
         And stern in thought.

     Thought, fed from time's memorial springs with pride,
         Made strong as fire
     Their hearts who hurled the foe down Flodden side,
     And hers who rode the waves none else durst ride--
         None save her sire.

     O land beloved, where nought of legend's dream
         Outshines the truth,
     Where Joyous Gard, closed round with clouds that gleam
     For them that know thee not, can scarce but seem
         Too sweet for sooth,

     Thy sons forget not, nor shall fame forget,
         The deed there done
     Before the walls whose fabled fame is yet
     A light too sweet and strong to rise and set
         With moon and sun.

     Song bright as flash of swords or oars that shine
         Through fight or foam
     Stirs yet the blood thou hast given thy sons like wine
     To hail in each bright ballad hailed as thine
         One heart, one home.

     Our Collingwood, though Nelson be not ours,
         By him shall stand
     Immortal, till those waifs of oldworld hours,
     Forgotten, leave uncrowned with bays and flowers
         Northumberland.




     STRATFORD-ON-AVON

     JUNE 27, 1901


     Be glad in heaven above all souls insphered,
     Most royal and most loyal born of men,
     Shakespeare, of all on earth beloved or feared
     Or worshipped, highest in sight of human ken.
     The homestead hallowed by thy sovereign birth,
     Whose name, being one with thine, stands higher than Rome,
     Forgets not how of all on English earth
     Their trust is holiest, there who have their home.
     Stratford is thine and England's. None that hate
     The commonweal whose empire sets men free
     Find comfort there, where once by grace of fate
     A soul was born as boundless as the sea.
         If life, if love, if memory now be thine,
         Rejoice that still thy Stratford bears thy sign.




     BURNS: AN ODE


     A fire of fierce and laughing light
     That clove the shuddering heart of night
     Leapt earthward, and the thunder's might
         That pants and yearns
     Made fitful music round its flight:
         And earth saw Burns.

     The joyous lightning found its voice
     And bade the heart of wrath rejoice
     And scorn uplift a song to voice
         The imperial hate
     That smote the God of base men's choice
         At God's own gate.

     Before the shrine of dawn, wherethrough
     The lark rang rapture as she flew,
     It flashed and fired the darkling dew:
         And all that heard
     With love or loathing hailed anew
         A new day's word.

     The servants of the lord of hell,
     As though their lord had blessed them, fell
     Foaming at mouth for fear, so well
         They knew the lie
     Wherewith they sought to scan and spell
         The unsounded sky.

     And Calvin, night's prophetic bird,
     Out of his home in hell was heard
     Shrieking; and all the fens were stirred
         Whence plague is bred;
     Can God endure the scoffer's word?
         But God was dead.

     The God they made them in despite
     Of man and woman, love and light,
     Strong sundawn and the starry night,
         The lie supreme,
     Shot through with song, stood forth to sight
         A devil's dream.

     And he that bent the lyric bow
     And laid the lord of darkness low
     And bade the fire of laughter glow
         Across his grave,
     And bade the tides above it flow,
         Wave hurtling wave,

     Shall he not win from latter days
     More than his own could yield of praise?
     Ay, could the sovereign singer's bays
         Forsake his brow,
     The warrior's, won on stormier ways,
         Still clasp it now.

     He loved, and sang of love: he laughed,
     And bade the cup whereout he quaffed
     Shine as a planet, fore and aft,
         And left and right,
     And keen as shoots the sun's first shaft
         Against the night.

     But love and wine were moon and sun
     For many a fame long since undone,
     And sorrow and joy have lost and won
         By stormy turns
     As many a singer's soul, if none
         More bright than Burns.

     And sweeter far in grief or mirth
     Have songs as glad and sad of birth
     Found voice to speak of wealth or dearth
         In joy of life:
     But never song took fire from earth
         More strong for strife.

     The daisy by his ploughshare cleft,
     The lips of women loved and left,
     The griefs and joys that weave the weft
         Of human time,
     With craftsman's cunning, keen and deft,
         He carved in rhyme.

     But Chaucer's daisy shines a star
     Above his ploughshare's reach to mar,
     And mightier vision gave Dunbar
         More strenuous wing
     To hear around all sins that are
         Hell dance and sing.

     And when such pride and power of trust
     In song's high gift to arouse from dust
     Death, and transfigure love or lust
         Through smiles or tears
     In golden speech that takes no rust
         From cankering years,

     As never spake but once in one
     Strong star-crossed child of earth and sun,
     Villon, made music such as none
         May praise or blame,
     A crown of starrier flower was won
         Than Burns may claim.

     But never, since bright earth was born
     In rapture of the enkindling morn,
     Might godlike wrath and sunlike scorn
         That was and is
     And shall be while false weeds are worn
         Find word like his.

     Above the rude and radiant earth
     That heaves and glows from firth to firth
     In vale and mountain, bright in dearth
         And warm in wealth,
     Which gave his fiery glory birth
         By chance and stealth,

     Above the storms of praise and blame
     That blur with mist his lustrous name,
     His thunderous laughter went and came,
         And lives and flies;
     The roar that follows on the flame
         When lightning dies.

     Earth, and the snow-dimmed heights of air,
     And water winding soft and fair
     Through still sweet places, bright and bare,
         By bent and byre,
     Taught him what hearts within them were:
         But his was fire.




     THE COMMONWEAL

     A SONG FOR UNIONISTS


     Men, whose fathers braved the world in arms against our isles in
           union,
       Men, whose brothers met rebellion face to face,
     Show the hearts ye have, if worthy long descent and high communion,
       Show the spirits, if unbroken, of your race.

     What are these that howl and hiss across the strait of westward
           water?
       What is he who floods our ears with speech in flood?
     See the long tongue lick the dripping hand that smokes and reeks of
           slaughter!
       See the man of words embrace the man of blood!

     Hear the plea whereby the tonguester mocks and charms the gazing
           gaper--
       "We are they whose works are works of love and peace;
     Till disunion bring forth union, what is union, sirs, but paper?
       Break and rend it, then shall trust and strength increase."

     Who would fear to trust a double-faced but single-hearted dreamer,
       Pure of purpose, clean of hand, and clear of guile?
     "Life is well-nigh spent," he sighs; "you call me shuffler,
           trickster, schemer?
       I am old--when young men yell at me, I smile."

     Many a year that priceless light of life has trembled, we remember,
       On the platform of extinction--unextinct;
     Many a month has been for him the long year's last--life's calm
           December:
       Can it be that he who said so, saying so, winked?

     No; the lust of life, the thirst for work and days with work to do
           in,
       Drove and drives him down the road of splendid shame;
     All is well, if o'er the monument recording England's ruin
       Time shall read, inscribed in triumph, Gladstone's name.

     Thieves and murderers, hands yet red with blood and tongues yet
           black with lies,
        Clap and clamour--"Parnell spurs his Gladstone well!"
     Truth, unscared and undeluded by their praise or blame, replies--
       "Is the goal of fraud and bloodshed heaven or hell?"

     Old men eloquent, who truckle to the traitors of the time,
       Love not office--power is no desire of theirs:
     What if yesterday their hearts recoiled from blood and fraud and
           crime?
       Conscience erred--an error which to-day repairs.

     Conscience only now convinces them of strange though transient
           error:
       Only now they see how fair is treason's face;
     See how true the falsehood, just the theft, and blameless is the
           terror,
       Which replaces just and blameless men in place.

     Place and time decide the right and wrong of thought and word and
           action;
       Crime is black as hell, till virtue gain its vote;
     Then--but ah, to think or say so smacks of fraud or smells of
           faction!--
       Mercy holds the door while Murder hacks the throat.

     Murder? Treason? Theft? Poor brothers who succumb to such
           temptations,
       Shall we lay on you or take on us the blame?
     Reason answers, and religion echoes round to wondering nations,
       "Not with Ireland, but with England rests the shame."

     Reason speaks through mild religion's organ, loud and long and
           lusty--
       Profit speaks through lips of patriots pure and true--
     "English friends, whose trust we ask for, has not England found us
           trusty?
       Not for us we seek advancement, but for you.

     "Far and near the world bears witness of our wisdom, courage,
           honour;
       Egypt knows if there our fame burns bright or dim.
     Let but England trust as Gordon trusted, soon shall come upon her
       Such deliverance as our daring brought on him.

     "Far and wide the world rings record of our faith, our constant
           dealing,
       Love of country, truth to friends, contempt for foes.
     Sign once more the bond of trust in us that here awaits but
           sealing,
       We will give yet more than all our record shows.

     "Perfect ruin, shame eternal, everlasting degradation,
       Freedom bought and sold, truth bound and treason free."
     Yet an hour is here for answer; now, if here be yet a nation,
       Answer, England, man by man from sea to sea!

     _June 30, 1886._




     THE QUESTION

     1887


     Shall England consummate the crime
       That binds the murderer's hand, and leaves
       No surety for the trust of thieves?
     Time pleads against it--truth and time--
       And pity frowns and grieves.

     The hoary henchman of the gang
       Lifts hands that never dew nor rain
       May cleanse from Gordon's blood again,
     Appealing: pity's tenderest pang
       Thrills his pure heart with pain.

     Grand helmsman of the clamorous crew,
       The good grey recreant quakes and weeps
       To think that crime no longer creeps
     Safe toward its end: that murderers too
       May die when mercy sleeps.

     While all the lives were innocent
       That slaughter drank, and laughed with rage,
       Bland virtue sighed, "A former age
     Taught murder: souls long discontent
       Can aught save blood assuage?

     "You blame not Russian hands that smite
       By fierce and secret ways the power
       That leaves not life one chainless hour;
     Have these than they less natural right
       To claim life's natural dower?

     "The dower that freedom brings the slave
       She weds, is vengeance: why should we,
       Whom equal laws acclaim as free,
     Think shame, if men too blindly brave
       Steal, murder, skulk, and flee?

     "At kings they strike in Russia: there
       Men take their life in hand who slay
       Kings: these, that have not heart to lay
     Hand save on girls whose ravaged hair
       Is made the patriot's prey,

     "These, whom the sight of old men slain
       Makes bold to bid their children die,
       Starved, if they hold not peace, nor lie,
     Claim loftier praise: could others deign
       To stand in shame so high?

     "Could others deign to dare such deeds
       As holiest Ireland hallows? Nay,
       But justice then makes plain our way:
     Be laws burnt up like burning weeds
       That vex the face of day.

     "Shall bloodmongers be held of us
       Blood-guilty? Hands reached out for gold
       Whereon blood rusts not yet, we hold
     Bloodless and blameless: ever thus
       Have good men held of old.

     "Fair Freedom, fledged and imped with lies,
       Takes flight by night where murder lurks,
       And broods on murderous ways and works,
     Yet seems not hideous in our eyes
       As Austrians or as Turks.

     "Be it ours to undo a woful past,
       To bid the bells of concord chime,
       To break the bonds of suffering crime,
     Slack now, that some would make more fast:
       Such teaching comes of time."

     So pleads the gentlest heart that lives,
       Whose pity, pitiless for all
       Whom darkling terror holds in thrall,
     Toward none save miscreants yearns, and gives
       Alms of warm tears--and gall.

     Hear, England, and obey: for he
       Who claims thy trust again to-day
       Is he who left thy sons a prey
     To shame whence only death sets free:
       Hear, England, and obey.

     Thy spoils he gave to deck the Dutch;
       Thy noblest pride, most pure, most brave,
       To death forlorn and sure he gave;
     Nor now requires he overmuch
       Who bids thee dig thy grave.

     Dig deep the grave of shame, wherein
       Thy fame, thy commonweal, must lie;
       Put thought of aught save terror by;
     To strike and slay the slayer is sin;
       And Murder must not die.

     Bind fast the true man; loose the thief;
       Shamed were the land, the laws accursed,
       Were guilt, not innocence, amerced;
     And dark the wrong and sore the grief,
       Were tyrants too coerced.

     The fiercest cowards that ever skulked,
       The cowardliest hounds that ever lapped
       Blood, if their horde be tracked and trapped,
     And justice claim their lives for mulct,
       Gnash teeth that flashed and snapped.

     Bow down for fear, then, England: bow,
       Lest worse befall thee yet; and swear
       That nought save pity, conscience, care
     For truth and mercy, moves thee now
       To call foul falsehood fair.

     So shalt thou live in shame, and hear
       The lips of all men laugh thee dead;
       The wide world's mockery round thy head
     Shriek like a storm-wind: and a bier
       Shall be thine honour's bed.




     APOSTASY

     _Et Judas m'a dit: Traître!_--VICTOR HUGO


     I

     Truths change with time, and terms with truth. To-day
         A statesman worships union, and to-night
         Disunion. Shame to have sinned against the light
     Confounds not but impels his tongue to unsay
     What yestereve he swore. Should fear make way
         For treason? honour change her livery? fright
         Clasp hands with interest? wrong pledge faith with right?
     Religion, mercy, conscience, answer--Yea.

     To veer is not to veer: when votes are weighed,
     The numerous tongue approves him renegade
         Who cannot change his banner: he that can
     Sits crowned with wreaths of praise too pure to fade.
         Truth smiles applause on treason's poisonous plan:
         And Cleon is an honourable man.


     II

     Pure faith, fond hope, sweet love, with God for guide,
         Move now the men whose blameless error cast
         In prison (ah, but love condones the past!)
     Their subject knaves that were--their lords that ride
     Now laughing on their necks, and now bestride
         Their vassal backs in triumph. Faith stands fast
         Though fear haul down the flag that crowned her mast
     And hope and love proclaim that truth has lied.

     Turn, turn, and turn--so bids the still small voice,
         The changeless voice of honour. He that stands
         Where all his life he stood, with bribeless hands,
     With tongue unhired to mourn, reprove, rejoice,
         Curse, bless, forswear, and swear again, and lie,
         Stands proven apostate in the apostate's eye.


     III

     Fraud shrinks from faith: at sight of swans, the raven
         Chides blackness, and the snake recoils aghast
         In fear of poison when a bird flies past.
     Thersites brands Achilles as a craven;
     The shoal fed full with shipwreck blames the haven
         For murderous lust of lives devoured, and vast
         Desire of doom whose feast is mercy's fast:
     And Bacon sees the traitor's mark engraven
     Full on the front of Essex. Grief and shame
         Obscure the chaste and sunlike spirit of Oates
     At thought of Russell's treason; and the name
     Of Milton sickens with superb disgust
         The heaving heart of Waller. Wisdom dotes,
     If wisdom turns not tail and licks not dust.


     IV

     The sole sweet land found fit to wed the sea,
         With reptile rebels at her heel of old,
         Set hard her heel upon them, and controlled
     The cowering poisonous peril. How should she
     Cower, and resign her trust of empire? Free
         As winds and waters live the loyal-souled
         And true-born sons that love her: nay, the bold
     Base knaves who curse her name have leave to be
     The loud-tongued liars they are. For she, beyond
     All woful years that bid men's hearts despond,
         Sees yet the likeness of her ancient fame
     Burn from the heavenward heights of history, hears
     Not Leicester's name but Sidney's--faith's, not fear's--
         Not Gladstone's now but only Gordon's name.




     RUSSIA: AN ODE

     1890


     I

     Out of hell a word comes hissing, dark as doom,
     Fierce as fire, and foul as plague-polluted gloom;
     Out of hell wherein the sinless damned endure
     More than ever sin conceived of pains impure;
     More than ever ground men's living souls to dust;
     Worse than madness ever dreamed of murderous lust.
     Since the world's wail first went up from lands and seas
     Ears have heard not, tongues have told not things like these.
     Dante, led by love's and hate's accordant spell
     Down the deepest and the loathliest ways of hell,
     Where beyond the brook of blood the rain was fire,
     Where the scalps were masked with dung more deep than mire,
     Saw not, where the filth was foulest, and the night
     Darkest, depths whose fiends could match the Muscovite.
     Set beside this truth, his deadliest vision seems
     Pale and pure and painless as a virgin's dreams.
     Maidens dead beneath the clasping lash, and wives
     Rent with deadlier pangs than death--for shame survives,
     Naked, mad, starved, scourged, spurned, frozen, fallen, deflowered,
     Souls and bodies as by fangs of beasts devoured,
     Sounds that hell would hear not, sights no thought could shape,
     Limbs that feel as flame the ravenous grasp of rape,
     Filth of raging crime and shame that crime enjoys,
     Age made one with youth in torture, girls with boys,
     These, and worse if aught be worse than these things are,
     Prove thee regent, Russia--praise thy mercy, Czar.


     II

     Sons of man, men born of women, may we dare
     Say they sin who dare be slain and dare not spare?
     They who take their lives in hand and smile on death,
     Holding life as less than sleep's most fitful breath,
     So their life perchance or death may serve and speed
     Faith and hope, that die if dream become not deed?
     Nought is death and nought is life and nought is fate
     Save for souls that love has clothed with fire of hate.
     These behold them, weigh them, prove them, find them nought,
     Save by light of hope and fire of burning thought.
     What though sun be less than storm where these aspire,
     Dawn than lightning, song than thunder, light than fire?
     Help is none in heaven: hope sees no gentler star:
     Earth is hell, and hell bows down before the Czar.
     All its monstrous, murderous, lecherous births acclaim
     Him whose empire lives to match its fiery fame.
     Nay, perchance at sight or sense of deeds here done,
     Here where men may lift up eyes to greet the sun,
     Hell recoils heart-stricken: horror worse than hell
     Darkens earth and sickens heaven; life knows the spell,
     Shudders, quails, and sinks--or, filled with fierier breath,
     Rises red in arms devised of darkling death.
     Pity mad with passion, anguish mad with shame,
     Call aloud on justice by her darker name;
     Love grows hate for love's sake; life takes death for guide.
     Night hath none but one red star--Tyrannicide.


     III

     "God or man, be swift; hope sickens with delay:
     Smite, and send him howling down his father's way!
     Fall, O fire of heaven, and smite as fire from hell
     Halls wherein men's torturers, crowned and cowering, dwell!
     These that crouch and shrink and shudder, girt with power--
     These that reign, and dare not trust one trembling hour--
     These omnipotent, whom terror curbs and drives--
     These whose life reflects in fear their victims' lives--
     These whose breath sheds poison worse than plague's thick breath--
     These whose reign is ruin, these whose word is death,
     These whose will turns heaven to hell, and day to night,
     These, if God's hand smite not, how shall man's not smite?"
     So from hearts by horror withered as by fire
     Surge the strains of unappeasable desire;
     Sounds that bid the darkness lighten, lit for death;
     Bid the lips whose breath was doom yield up their breath;
     Down the way of Czars, awhile in vain deferred,
     Bid the Second Alexander light the Third.
     How for shame shall men rebuke them? how may we
     Blame, whose fathers died, and slew, to leave us free?
     We, though all the world cry out upon them, know,
     Were our strife as theirs, we could not strike but so;
     Could not cower, and could not kiss the hands that smite;
     Could not meet them armed in sunlit battle's light.
     Dark as fear and red as hate though morning rise,
     Life it is that conquers; death it is that dies.




     FOR GREECE AND CRETE


     Storm and shame and fraud and darkness fill the nations full with
           night:
     Hope and fear whose eyes yearn eastward have but fire and sword in
           sight:
     One alone, whose name is one with glory, sees and seeks the light.

     Hellas, mother of the spirit, sole supreme in war and peace,
     Land of light, whose word remembered bids all fear and sorrow
           cease,
     Lives again, while freedom lightens eastward yet for sons of
           Greece.

     Greece, where only men whose manhood was as godhead ever trod,
     Bears the blind world witness yet of light wherewith her feet are
           shod:
     Freedom, armed of Greece was always very man and very God.

     Now the winds of old that filled her sails with triumph, when the
           fleet
     Bound for death from Asia fled before them stricken, wake to greet
     Ships full-winged again for freedom toward the sacred shores of
           Crete.

     There was God born man, the song that spake of old time said: and
           there
     Man, made even as God by trust that shows him nought too dire to
           dare,
     Now may light again the beacon lit when those we worship were.

     Sharp the concert wrought of discord shrills the tune of shame and
           death,
     Turk by Christian fenced and fostered, Mecca backed by Nazareth:
     All the powerless powers, tongue-valiant, breathe but greed's or
           terror's breath.

     Though the tide that feels the west wind lift it wave by widening
           wave
     Wax not yet to height and fullness of the storm that smites to
           save,
     None shall bid the flood back seaward till no bar be left to brave.




     DELPHIC HYMN TO APOLLO

     (B.C. 280)

     DONE INTO ENGLISH


     I

           Thee, the son of God most high,
           Famed for harping song, will I
     Proclaim, and the deathless oracular word
     From the snow-topped rock that we gaze on heard,
           Counsels of thy glorious giving
           Manifest for all men living,
     How thou madest the tripod of prophecy thine
     Which the wrath of the dragon kept guard on, a shrine
           Voiceless till thy shafts could smite
           All his live coiled glittering might.


     II

           Ye that hold of right alone
           All deep woods on Helicon,
     Fair daughters of thunder-girt God, with your bright
     White arms uplift as to lighten the light,
           Come to chant your brother's praise,
           Gold-haired Phoebus, loud in lays,
     Even his, who afar up the twin-topped seat
     Of the rock Parnassian whereon we meet
           Risen with glorious Delphic maids
           Seeks the soft spring-sweetened shades
     Castalian, fain of the Delphian peak
     Prophetic, sublime as the feet that seek.
           Glorious Athens, highest of state,
           Come, with praise and prayer elate,
     O thou that art queen of the plain unscarred
     That the warrior Tritonid hath alway in guard,
           Where on many a sacred shrine
           Young bulls' thigh-bones burn and shine
     As the god that is fire overtakes them, and fast
     The smoke of Arabia to heavenward is cast,
           Scattering wide its balm: and shrill
           Now with nimble notes that thrill
     The flute strikes up for the song, and the harp of gold
     Strikes up to the song sweet answer: and all behold,
           All, aswarm as bees, give ear,
           Who by birth hold Athens dear.




     A NEW CENTURY


     An age too great for thought of ours to scan,
       A wave upon the sleepless sea of time
       That sinks and sleeps for ever, ere the chime
     Pass that salutes with blessing, not with ban,
     The dark year dead, the bright year born for man,
       Dies: all its days that watched man cower and climb,
       Frail as the foam, and as the sun sublime,
     Sleep sound as they that slept ere these began.

     Our mother earth, whose ages none may tell,
       Puts on no change: time bids not her wax pale
     Or kindle, quenched or quickened, when the knell
       Sounds, and we cry across the veering gale
     Farewell--and midnight answers us, Farewell;
       Hail--and the heaven of morning answers, Hail.




     AN EVENING AT VICHY

     SEPTEMBER 1896

     WRITTEN ON THE NEWS OF THE DEATH OF LORD LEIGHTON


     A light has passed that never shall pass away,
       A sun has set whose rays are unquelled of night.
     The loyal grace, the courtesy bright as day,
       The strong sweet radiant spirit of life and light
       That shone and smiled and lightened on all men's sight,
     The kindly life whose tune was the tune of May,
       For us now dark, for love and for fame is bright.

     Nay, not for us that live as the fen-fires live,
       As stars that shoot and shudder with life and die,
     Can death make dark that lustre of life, or give
       The grievous gift of trust in oblivion's lie.
       Days dear and far death touches, and draws them nigh,
     And bids the grief that broods on their graves forgive
       The day that seems to mock them as clouds that fly.

     If life be life more faithful than shines on sleep
       When dreams take wing and lighten and fade like flame,
     Then haply death may be not a death so deep
       That all things past are past for it wholly--fame,
       Love, loving-kindness, seasons that went and came,
     And left their light on life as a seal to keep
       Winged memory fast and heedful of time's dead claim.

     Death gives back life and light to the sunless years
       Whose suns long sunken set not for ever. Time,
     Blind, fierce, and deaf as tempest, relents, and hears
       And sees how bright the days and how sweet their chime
       Rang, shone, and passed in music that matched the clime
     Wherein we met rejoicing--a joy that cheers
       Sorrow, to see the night as the dawn sublime.

     The days that were outlighten the days that are,
       And eyes now darkened shine as the stars we see
     And hear not sing, impassionate star to star,
       As once we heard the music that haply he
       Hears, high in heaven if ever a voice may be
     The same in heaven, the same as on earth, afar
       From pain and earth as heaven from the heaving sea.

     A woman's voice, divine as a bird's by dawn
       Kindled and stirred to sunward, arose and held
     Our souls that heard, from earth as from sleep withdrawn,
       And filled with light as stars, and as stars compelled
       To move by might of music, elate while quelled,
     Subdued by rapture, lit as a mountain lawn
       By morning whence all heaven in the sunrise welled.

     And her the shadow of death as a robe clasped round
       Then: and as morning's music she passed away.
     And he then with us, warrior and wanderer, crowned
       With fame that shone from eastern on western day,
       More strong, more kind, than praise or than grief might say,
     Has passed now forth of shadow by sunlight bound,
       Of night shot through with light that is frail as May.

     May dies, and light grows darkness, and life grows death:
       Hope fades and shrinks and falls as a changing leaf:
     Remembrance, touched and kindled by love's live breath,
       Shines, and subdues the shadow of time called grief,
       The shade whose length of life is as life's date brief,
     With joy that broods on the sunlight past, and saith
       That thought and love hold sorrow and change in fief.

     Sweet, glad, bright spirit, kind as the sun seems kind
       When earth and sea rejoice in his gentler spell,
     Thy face that was we see not; bereft and blind,
       We see but yet, rejoicing to see, and dwell
       Awhile in days that heard not the death-day's knell,
     A light so bright that scarcely may sorrow find
       One old sweet word that hails thee and mourns--Farewell.




     TO GEORGE FREDERICK WATTS

     ON THE EIGHTIETH ANNIVERSARY OF HIS BIRTH, FEBRUARY 23, 1897


     High thought and hallowed love, by faith made one,
       Begat and bare the sweet strong-hearted child,
     Art, nursed of Nature; earth and sea and sun
       Saw Nature then more godlike as she smiled.
     Life smiled on death, and death on life: the Soul
       Between them shone, and soared above their strife,
     And left on Time's unclosed and starry scroll
       A sign that quickened death to deathless life.
     Peace rose like Hope, a patient queen, and bade
       Hell's firstborn, Faith, abjure her creed and die;
     And Love, by life and death made sad and glad,
       Gave Conscience ease, and watched Good Will pass by.
     All these make music now of one man's name,
     Whose life and age are one with love and fame.




     ON THE DEATH OF MRS. LYNN LINTON


     Kind, wise, and true as truth's own heart,
           A soul that here
     Chose and held fast the better part
           And cast out fear,

     Has left us ere we dreamed of death
           For life so strong,
     Clear as the sundawn's light and breath,
           And sweet as song.

     We see no more what here awhile
           Shed light on men:
     Has Landor seen that brave bright smile
           Alive again?

     If death and life and love be one
           And hope no lie
     And night no stronger than the sun,
           These cannot die.

     The father-spirit whence her soul
           Took strength, and gave
     Back love, is perfect yet and whole,
           As hope might crave.

     His word is living light and fire:
           And hers shall live
     By grace of all good gifts the sire
           Gave power to give.

     The sire and daughter, twain and one
           In quest and goal,
     Stand face to face beyond the sun,
           And soul to soul.

     Not we, who loved them well, may dream
           What joy sublime
     Is theirs, if dawn through darkness gleam,
           And life through time.

     Time seems but here the mask of death,
           That falls and shows
     A void where hope may draw not breath:
           Night only knows.

     Love knows not: all that love may keep
           Glad memory gives:
     The spirit of the days that sleep
           Still wakes and lives.

     But not the spirit's self, though song
           Would lend it speech,
     May touch the goal that hope might long
           In vain to reach.

     How dear that high true heart, how sweet
           Those keen kind eyes,
     Love knows, who knows how fiery fleet
           Is life that flies.

     If life there be that flies not, fair
           The life must be
     That thrills her sovereign spirit there
           And sets it free.




     IN MEMORY OF AURELIO SAFFI


     Beloved above all nations, land adored,
     Sovereign in spirit and charm, by song and sword,
       Sovereign whose life is love, whose name is light,
     Italia, queen that hast the sun for lord,

     Bride that hast heaven for bridegroom, how should night
     Veil or withhold from faith's and memory's sight
       A man beloved and crowned of thee and fame,
     Hide for an hour his name's memorial might?

     Thy sons may never speak or hear the name
     Saffi, and feel not love's regenerate flame
       Thrill all the quickening heart with faith and pride
     In one whose life makes death and life the same.

     They die indeed whose souls before them died:
     Not he, for whom death flung life's portal wide,
       Who stands where Dante's soul in vision came,
     In Dante's presence, by Mazzini's side.

     _March 26, 1896._




     CARNOT


     Death, winged with fire of hate from deathless hell
       Wherein the souls of anarchs hiss and die,
       With stroke as dire has cloven a heart as high
     As twice beyond the wide sea's westward swell
     The living lust of death had power to quell
       Through ministry of murderous hands whereby
       Dark fate bade Lincoln's head and Garfield's lie
     Low even as his who bids his France farewell.

     France, now no heart that would not weep with thee
       Loved ever faith or freedom. From thy hand
       The staff of state is broken: hope, unmanned
     With anguish, doubts if freedom's self be free.
       The snake-souled anarch's fang strikes all the land
     Cold, and all hearts unsundered by the sea.

     _June 25, 1894._




     AFTER THE VERDICT


     France, cloven in twain by fire of hell and hate,
       Shamed with the shame of men her meanest born,
       Soldier and judge whose names, inscribed for scorn,
     Stand vilest on the record writ of fate,
     Lies yet not wholly vile who stood so great,
       Sees yet not all her praise of old outworn.
       Not yet is all her scroll of glory torn,
     Or left for utter shame to desecrate.
     High souls and constant hearts of faithful men
     Sustain her perfect praise with tongue and pen
     Indomitable as honour. Storms may toss
       And soil her standard ere her bark win home:
     But shame falls full upon the Christless cross
       Whose brandmark signs the holy hounds of Rome.

     _September 1899._




     THE TRANSVAAL


     Patience, long sick to death, is dead. Too long
       Have sloth and doubt and treason bidden us be
       What Cromwell's England was not, when the sea
     To him bore witness given of Blake how strong
     She stood, a commonweal that brooked no wrong
       From foes less vile than men like wolves set free
       Whose war is waged where none may fight or flee--
     With women and with weanlings. Speech and song
     Lack utterance now for loathing. Scarce we hear
       Foul tongues that blacken God's dishonoured name
       With prayers turned curses and with praise found shame
     Defy the truth whose witness now draws near
       To scourge these dogs, agape with jaws afoam,
       Down out of life. Strike, England, and strike home.

     _October 9, 1899._




     REVERSE


     The wave that breaks against a forward stroke
       Beats not the swimmer back, but thrills him through
       With joyous trust to win his way anew
     Through stronger seas than first upon him broke
     And triumphed. England's iron-tempered oak
       Shrank not when Europe's might against her grew
       Full, and her sun drank up her foes like dew,
     And lion-like from sleep her strength awoke.

     As bold in fight as bold in breach of trust
       We find our foes, and wonder not to find,
       Nor grudge them praise whom honour may not bind;
     But loathing more intense than speaks disgust
       Heaves England's heart, when scorn is bound to greet
       Hunters and hounds whose tongues would lick their feet.

     _November 1, 1899._




     THE TURNING OF THE TIDE


     Storm, strong with all the bitter heart of hate,
       Smote England, now nineteen dark years ago,
       As when the tide's full wrath in seaward flow
     Smites and bears back the swimmer. Fraud and fate
     Were leagued against her: fear was fain to prate
       Of honour in dishonour, pride brought low,
       And humbleness whence holiness must grow,
     And greatness born of shame to be so great.

     The winter day that withered hope and pride
     Shines now triumphal on the turning tide
       That sets once more our trust in freedom free,
     That leaves a ruthless and a truthless foe
     And all base hopes that hailed his cause laid low,
       And England's name a light on land and sea.

     _February 27, 1900._




     ON THE DEATH OF COLONEL BENSON


     Northumberland, so proud and sad to-day,
       Weep and rejoice, our mother, whom no son
       More glorious than this dead and deathless one
     Brought ever fame whereon no time shall prey.
     Nor heed we more than he what liars dare say
       Of mercy's holiest duties left undone
       Toward whelps and dams of murderous foes, whom none
     Save we had spared or feared to starve and slay.

     Alone as Milton and as Wordsworth found
     And hailed their England, when from all around
       Howled all the recreant hate of envious knaves,
     Sublime she stands: while, stifled in the sound,
       Each lie that falls from German boors and slaves
       Falls but as filth dropt in the wandering waves.

     _November 4, 1901._




     ASTRÆA VICTRIX


             England, elect of time,
             By freedom sealed sublime,
         And constant as the sun that saw thy dawn
             Outshine upon the sea
             His own in heaven, to be
         A light that night nor day should see withdrawn,
           If song may speak not now thy praise,
     Fame writes it higher than song may soar or faith may gaze.

             Dark months of months beheld
             Hope thwarted, crossed, and quelled,
         And heard the heartless hounds of hatred bay
             Aloud against thee, glad
             As now their souls are sad
         Who see their hope in hatred pass away
           And wither into shame and fear
     And shudder down to darkness, loth to see or hear.

             Nought now they hear or see
             That speaks or shows not thee
         Triumphant; not as empires reared of yore,
             The imperial commonweal
             That bears thy sovereign seal
         And signs thine orient as thy natural shore
           Free, as no sons but thine may stand,
     Steers lifeward ever, guided of thy pilot hand.

             Fear, masked and veiled by fraud,
             Found shameful time to applaud
         Shame, and bow down thy banner towards the dust,
             And call on godly shame
             To desecrate thy name
         And bid false penitence abjure thy trust:
           Till England's heart took thought at last,
     And felt her future kindle from her fiery past.

             Then sprang the sunbright fire
             High as the sun, and higher
         Than strange men's eyes might watch it undismayed:
             But winds athwart it blew
             Storm, and the twilight grew
         Darkness awhile, an unenduring shade:
           And all base birds and beasts of night
     Saw no more England now to fear, no loathsome light.

             All knaves and slaves at heart
             Who, knowing thee what thou art,
         Abhor thee, seeing what none save here may see,
             Strong freedom, taintless truth,
             Supreme in ageless youth,
         Howled all their hate and hope aloud at thee
           While yet the wavering wind of strife
     Bore hard against her sail whose freight is hope and life.

             And now the quickening tide
             That brings back power and pride
         To faith and love whose ensign is thy name
             Bears down the recreant lie
             That doomed thy name to die,
         Sons, friends, and foes behold thy star the same
           As when it stood in heaven a sun
     And Europe saw no glory left her sky save one.

             And now, as then she saw,
             She sees with shamefast awe
         How all unlike all slaves and tyrants born
             Where bondmen champ the bit
             And anarchs foam and flit,
         And day mocks day, and year puts year to scorn,
           Our mother bore us, English men,
     Ashamed of shame and strong in mercy, now as then.

             We loosed not on these knaves
             Their scourge-tormented slaves:
         We held the hand that fain had risen to smite
             The torturer fast, and made
             Justice awhile afraid,
         And righteousness forego her ruthless right:
           We warred not even with these as they;
     We bade not them they preyed on make of them their prey.

             All murderous fraud that lurks
             In hearts where hell's craft works
         Fought, crawled, and slew in darkness: they that died
             Dreamed not of foes too base
             For scorn to grant them grace:
         Men wounded, women, children at their side,
           Had found what faith in fiends may live:
     And yet we gave not back what righteous doom would give.

             No false white flag that fawns
             On faith till murder dawns
         Blood-red from hell-black treason's heart of hate
             Left ever shame's foul brand
             Seared on an English hand:
         And yet our pride vouchsafes them grace too great
           For other pride to dream of: scorn
     Strikes retribution silent as the stars at morn.

             And now the living breath
             Whose life puts death to death,
         Freedom, whose name is England, stirs and thrills
             The burning darkness through
             Whence fraud and slavery grew,
         We scarce may mourn our dead whose fame fulfils
           The record where her foes have read
     That earth shall see none like her born ere earth be dead.




     THE FIRST OF JUNE


     Peace and war are one in proof of England's deathless praise.
       One divine day saw her foemen scattered on the sea
     Far and fast as storm could speed: the same strong day of days
       Sees the imperial commonweal set friends and foemen free.
     Save where freedom reigns, whose name is England, fraud and fear
       Grind and blind the face of men who look on her and lie:
     Now may truth and pride in truth, whose seat of old was here,
       See them shamed and stricken blind and dumb as worms that die.
     Even before our hallowed hawthorn-blossom pass and cease,
       Even as England shines and smiles at last upon the sun,
     Comes the word that means for England more than passing peace,
       Peace with honour, peace with pride in righteous work well done.
     Crowned with flowers the first of all the world and all the year,
     Peace, whose name is one with honour born of war, is here.




     ROUNDEL

     FROM THE FRENCH OF VILLON


     Death, I would plead against thy wrong,
       Who hast reft me of my love, my wife,
       And art not satiate yet with strife,
     But needs wilt hold me lingering long.
     No strength since then has kept me strong:
       But what could hurt thee in her life,
           Death?

     Twain we were, and our hearts one song,
       One heart: if that be dead, thy knife
       Hath cut me off alive from life,
     Dead as the carver's figured throng,
           Death!




     A ROUNDEL OF RABELAIS


     Theleme is afar on the waters, adrift and afar,
     Afar and afloat on the waters that flicker and gleam,
     And we feel but her fragrance and see but the shadows that mar
           Theleme.

     In the sun-coloured mists of the sunrise and sunset that steam
     As incense from urns of the twilight, her portals ajar
     Let pass as a shadow the light of the sound of a dream.

     But the laughter that rings from her cloisters that know not a bar
     So kindles delight in desire that the souls in us deem
     He erred not, the seer who discerned on the seas as a star
           Theleme.




     LUCIFER

     _Écrasez l'infâme._--VOLTAIRE

     _Les prêtres ont raison de l'appeler Lucifer._--VICTOR HUGO


     Voltaire, our England's lover, man divine
       Beyond all Gods that ever fear adored
       By right and might, by sceptre and by sword,
     By godlike love of sunlike truth, made thine
     Through godlike hate of falsehood's marshlight shine
       And all the fume of creeds and deeds abhorred
       Whose light was darkness, till the dawn-star soared,
     Truth, reason, mercy, justice, keep thy shrine
     Sacred in memory's temple, seeing that none
     Of all souls born to strive before the sun
       Loved ever good or hated evil more.
     The snake that felt thy heel upon her head,
     Night's first-born, writhes as though she were not dead,
       But strikes not, stings not, slays not as before.




     THE CENTENARY OF ALEXANDRE DUMAS


     Sound of trumpets blowing down the merriest winds of morn,
       Flash of hurtless lightnings, laugh of thunders loud and glad,
     Here should hail the summer day whereon a light was born
       Whence the sun grew brighter, seeing the world less dark and sad.
     Man of men by right divine of boyhood everlasting,
       France incarnate, France immortal in her deathless boy,
     Brighter birthday never shone than thine on earth, forecasting
       More of strenuous mirth in manhood, more of manful joy.
     Child of warriors, friend of warriors, Garibaldi's friend,
       Even thy name is as the splendour of a sunbright sword:
     While the boy's heart beats in man, thy fame shall find not end:
       Time and dark oblivion bow before thee as their lord.
     Youth acclaims thee gladdest of the gods that gild his days:
     Age gives thanks for thee, and death lacks heart to quench thy
           praise.




     AT A DOG'S GRAVE


     I

     Good night, we say, when comes the time to win
     The daily death divine that shuts up sight,
     Sleep, that assures for all who dwell therein
                 Good night.

     The shadow shed round those we love shines bright
     As love's own face, when death, sleep's gentler twin,
     From them divides us even as night from light.

     Shall friends born lower in life, though pure of sin,
     Though clothed with love and faith to usward plight,
     Perish and pass unbidden of us, their kin,
                 Good night?


     II

     To die a dog's death once was held for shame.
     Not all men so beloved and mourned shall lie
     As many of these, whose time untimely came
                 To die.

     His years were full: his years were joyous: why
     Must love be sorrow, when his gracious name
     Recalls his lovely life of limb and eye?

     If aught of blameless life on earth may claim
     Life higher than death, though death's dark wave rise high,
     Such life as this among us never came
                 To die.


     III

     White violets, there by hands more sweet than they
     Planted, shall sweeten April's flowerful air
     About a grave that shows to night and day
                 White violets there.

     A child's light hands, whose touch makes flowers more fair,
     Keep fair as these for many a March and May
     The light of days that are because they were.

     It shall not like a blossom pass away;
     It broods and brightens with the days that bear
     Fresh fruits of love, but leave, as love might pray,
                 White violets there.




     THREE WEEKS OLD


     Three weeks since there was no such rose in being;
       Now may eyes made dim with deep delight
     See how fair it is, laugh with love, and seeing
       Praise the chance that bids us bless the sight.

     Three weeks old, and a very rose of roses,
       Bright and sweet as love is sweet and bright.
     Heaven and earth, till a man's life wanes and closes,
       Show not life or love a lovelier sight.

     Three weeks past have renewed the rosebright creature
       Day by day with life, and night by night.
     Love, though fain of its every faultless feature,
       Finds not words to match the silent sight.




     A CLASP OF HANDS


     I

     Soft, small, and sweet as sunniest flowers
         That bask in heavenly heat
     When bud by bud breaks, breathes, and cowers,
         Soft, small, and sweet.

     A babe's hands open as to greet
         The tender touch of ours
     And mock with motion faint and fleet

     The minutes of the new strange hours
         That earth, not heaven, must mete;
     Buds fragrant still from heaven's own bowers,
         Soft, small, and sweet.


     II

     A velvet vice with springs of steel
         That fasten in a trice
     And clench the fingers fast that feel
         A velvet vice--

     What man would risk the danger twice,
         Nor quake from head to heel?
     Whom would not one such test suffice?

     Well may we tremble as we kneel
         In sight of Paradise,
     If both a babe's closed fists conceal
         A velvet vice.


     III

     Two flower-soft fists of conquering clutch,
         Two creased and dimpled wrists,
     That match, if mottled overmuch,
         Two flower-soft fists--

     What heart of man dare hold the lists
         Against such odds and such
     Sweet vantage as no strength resists?

     Our strength is all a broken crutch,
         Our eyes are dim with mists,
     Our hearts are prisoners as we touch
         Two flower-soft fists.




     PROLOGUE TO DOCTOR FAUSTUS


     Light, as when dawn takes wing and smites the sea,
     Smote England when his day bade Marlowe be.
     No fire so keen had thrilled the clouds of time
     Since Dante's breath made Italy sublime.
     Earth, bright with flowers whose dew shone soft as tears,
     Through Chaucer cast her charm on eyes and ears:
     The lustrous laughter of the love-lit earth
     Rang, leapt, and lightened in his might of mirth.
     Deep moonlight, hallowing all the breathless air,
     Made earth and heaven for Spenser faint and fair.
     But song might bid not heaven and earth be one
     Till Marlowe's voice gave warning of the sun.
     Thought quailed and fluttered as a wounded bird
     Till passion fledged the wing of Marlowe's word.
     Faith born of fear bade hope and doubt be dumb
     Till Marlowe's pride bade light or darkness come.
     Then first our speech was thunder: then our song
     Shot lightning through the clouds that wrought us wrong.
     Blind fear, whose faith feeds hell with fire, became
     A moth self-shrivelled in its own blind flame.
     We heard, in tune with even our seas that roll,
     The speech of storm, the thunders of the soul.
     Men's passions, clothed with all the woes they wrought,
     Shone through the fire of man's transfiguring thought.
     The thirst of knowledge, quenchless at her springs,
     Ambition, fire that clasps the thrones of kings,
     Love, light that makes of life one lustrous hour,
     And song, the soul's chief crown and throne of power,
     The hungering heart of greed and ravenous hate,
     Made music high as heaven and deep as fate.
     Strange pity, scarce half scornful of her tear,
     In Berkeley's vaults bowed down on Edward's bier.
     But higher in forceful flight of song than all
     The soul of man, its own imperious thrall,
     Rose, when his royal spirit of fierce desire
     Made life and death for man one flame of fire.
     Incarnate man, fast bound as earth and sea,
     Spake, when his pride would fain set Faustus free.
     Eternal beauty, strong as day and night,
     Shone, when his word bade Helen back to sight.
     Fear, when he bowed the soul before her spell,
     Thundered and lightened through the vaults of hell.
     The music known of all men's tongues that sing,
     When Marlowe sang, bade love make heaven of spring;
     The music none but English tongues may make,
     Our own sole song, spake first when Marlowe spake;
     And on his grave, though there no stone may stand,
     The flower it shows was laid by Shakespeare's hand.




     PROLOGUE TO ARDEN OF FEVERSHAM


     Love dark as death and fierce as fire on wing
     Sustains in sin the soul that feels it cling
     Like flame whose tongues are serpents: hope and fear
     Die when a love more dire than hate draws near,
     And stings to death the heart it cleaves in twain,
     And leaves in ashes all but fear and pain.
     Our lustrous England rose to life and light
     From Rome's and hell's immitigable night,
     And music laughed and quickened from her breath,
     When first her sons acclaimed Elizabeth.
     Her soul became a lyre that all men heard
     Who felt their souls give back her lyric word.
     Yet now not all at once her perfect power
     Spake: man's deep heart abode awhile its hour,
     Abode its hour of utterance; not to wake
     Till Marlowe's thought in thunderous music spake.
     But yet not yet was passion's tragic breath
     Thrilled through with sense of instant life and death,
     Life actual even as theirs who watched the strife,
     Death dark and keen and terrible as life.
     Here first was truth in song made perfect: here
     Woke first the war of love and hate and fear.
     A man too vile for thought's or shame's control
     Holds empire on a woman's loftier soul,
     And withers it to wickedness: in vain
     Shame quickens thought with penitential pain:
     In vain dark chance's fitful providence
     Withholds the crime, and chills the spirit of sense:
     It wakes again in fire that burns away
     Repentance, weak as night devoured of day.
     Remorse, and ravenous thirst of sin and crime,
     Rend and consume the soul in strife sublime,
     And passion cries on pity till it hear
     And tremble as with love that casts out fear.
     Dark as the deed and doom he gave to fame
     For ever lies the sovereign singer's name.
     Sovereign and regent on the soul he lives
     While thought gives thanks for aught remembrance gives,
     And mystery sees the imperial shadow stand
     By Marlowe's side alone at Shakespeare's hand.




     PROLOGUE TO OLD FORTUNATUS


     The golden bells of fairyland, that ring
     Perpetual chime for childhood's flower-sweet spring,
     Sang soft memorial music in his ear
     Whose answering music shines about us here.
     Soft laughter as of light that stirs the sea
     With darkling sense of dawn ere dawn may be,
     Kind sorrow, pity touched with gentler scorn,
     Keen wit whose shafts were sunshafts of the morn,
     Love winged with fancy, fancy thrilled with love,
     An eagle's aim and ardour in a dove,
     A man's delight and passion in a child,
     Inform it as when first they wept and smiled.
     Life, soiled and rent and ringed about with pain
     Whose touch lent action less of spur than chain,
     Left half the happiness his birth designed,
     And half the power, unquenched in heart and mind.
     Comrade and comforter, sublime in shame,
     A poor man bound in prison whence he came
     Poor, and took up the burden of his life
     Smiling, and strong to strive with sorrow and strife,
     He spake in England's ear the poor man's word,
     Manful and mournful, deathless and unheard.
     His kind great heart was fire, and love's own fire,
     Compassion, strong as flesh may feel desire,
     To enkindle pity and mercy toward a soul
     Sunk down in shame too deep for shame's control.
     His kind keen eye was light to lighten hope
     Where no man else might see life's darkness ope
     And pity's touch bring forth from evil good,
     Sweet as forgiveness, strong as fatherhood.
     Names higher than his outshine it and outsoar,
     But none save one should memory cherish more:
     Praise and thanksgiving crown the names above,
     But him we give the gift he gave us, love.




     PROLOGUE TO THE DUCHESS OF MALFY


     When Shakespeare soared from life to death, above
     All praise, all adoration, save of love,
     As here on earth above all men he stood
     That were or are or shall be--great, and good,
     Past thank or thought of England or of man--
     Light from the sunset quickened as it ran.
     His word, who sang as never man may sing
     And spake as never voice of man may ring,
     Not fruitless fell, as seed on sterile ways,
     But brought forth increase even to Shakespeare's praise.
     Our skies were thrilled and filled, from sea to sea,
     With stars outshining all their suns to be.
     No later light of tragic song they knew
     Like his whose lightning clove the sunset through.
     Half Shakespeare's glory, when his hand sublime
     Bade all the change of tragic life and time
     Live, and outlive all date of quick and dead,
     Fell, rested, and shall rest on Webster's head.
     Round him the shadows cast on earth by light
     Rose, changed, and shone, transfiguring death and night.
     Where evil only crawled and hissed and slew
     On ways where nought save shame and bloodshed grew,
     He bade the loyal light of honour live,
     And love, when stricken through the heart, forgive.
     Deep down the midnight of the soul of sin
     He lit the star of mercy throned therein.
     High up the darkness of sublime despair
     He set the sun of love to triumph there.
     Things foul or frail his touch made strong and pure,
     And bade things transient like to stars endure.
     Terror, on wings whose flight made night in heaven,
     Pity, with hands whence life took love for leaven,
     Breathed round him music whence his mortal breath
     Drew life that bade forgetfulness and death
     Die: life that bids his light of fiery fame
     Endure with England's, yea, with Shakespeare's name.




     PROLOGUE TO THE REVENGER'S TRAGEDY


     Fire, and behind the breathless flight of fire
     Thunder that quickens fear and quells desire,
     Make bright and loud the terror of the night
     Wherein the soul sees only wrath for light.
     Wrath winged by love and sheathed by grief in steel
     Sets on the front of crime death's withering seal.
     The heaving horror of the storms of sin
     Brings forth in fear the lightning hid therein,
     And flashes back to darkness: truth, found pure
     And perfect, asks not heaven if shame endure.
     What life and death were his whose raging song
     Bore heaven such witness of the wild world's wrong,
     What hand was this that grasped such thunder, none
     Knows: night and storm seclude him from the sun.
     By daytime none discerns the fire of Mars:
     Deep darkness bares to sight the sterner stars,
     The lights whose dawn seems doomsday. None may tell
     Whence rose a world so lit from heaven and hell.
     Life-wasting love, hate born of raging lust,
     Fierce retribution, fed with death's own dust
     And sorrow's pampering poison, cross and meet,
     And wind the world in passion's winding-sheet.
     So, when dark faith in faith's dark ages heard
     Falsehood, and drank the poison of the Word,
     Two shades misshapen came to monstrous birth,
     A father fiend in heaven, a thrall on earth:
     Man, meanest born of beasts that press the sod,
     And die: the vilest of his creatures, God.
     A judge unjust, a slave that praised his name,
     Made life and death one fire of sin and shame.
     And thence reverberate even on Shakespeare's age
     A light like darkness crossed his sunbright stage.
     Music, sublime as storm or sorrow, sang
     Before it: tempest like a harpstring rang.
     The fiery shadow of a name unknown
     Rose, and in song's high heaven abides alone.




     PROLOGUE TO THE BROKEN HEART


     The mightiest choir of song that memory hears
     Gave England voice for fifty lustrous years.
     Sunrise and thunder fired and shook the skies
     That saw the sun-god Marlowe's opening eyes.
     The morn's own music, answered of the sea,
     Spake, when his living lips bade Shakespeare be,
     And England, made by Shakespeare's quickening breath
     Divine and deathless even till life be death,
     Brought forth to time such godlike sons of men
     That shamefaced love grows pride, and now seems then.
     Shame that their day so shone, so sang, so died,
     Remembering, finds remembrance one with pride.
     That day was clouding toward a stormlit close
     When Ford's red sphere upon the twilight rose.
     Sublime with stars and sunset fire, the sky
     Glowed as though day, nigh dead, should never die.
     Sorrow supreme and strange as chance or doom
     Shone, spake, and shuddered through the lustrous gloom.
     Tears lit with love made all the darkening air
     Bright as though death's dim sunrise thrilled it there
     And life re-risen took comfort. Stern and still
     As hours and years that change and anguish fill,
     The strong secluded spirit, ere it woke,
     Dwelt dumb till power possessed it, and it spoke.
     Strange, calm, and sure as sense of beast or bird,
     Came forth from night the thought that breathed the word;
     That chilled and thrilled with passion-stricken breath
     Halls where Calantha trod the dance of death.
     A strength of soul too passionately pure
     To change for aught that horror bids endure,
     To quail and wail and weep faint life away
     Ere sovereign sorrow smite, relent, and slay,
     Sustained her silent, till her bridal bloom
     Changed, smiled, and waned in rapture toward the tomb.
     Terror twin-born with pity kissed and thrilled
     The lips that Shakespeare's word or Webster's filled:
     Here both, cast out, fell silent: pity shrank,
     Rebuked, and terror, spirit-stricken, sank:
     The soul assailed arose afar above
     All reach of all but only death and love.




     PROLOGUE TO A VERY WOMAN


     Swift music made of passion's changeful power,
     Sweet as the change that leaves the world in flower
     When spring laughs winter down to deathward, rang
     From grave and gracious lips that smiled and sang
     When Massinger, too wise for kings to hear
     And learn of him truth, wisdom, faith, or fear,
     Gave all his gentler heart to love's light lore,
     That grief might brood and scorn breed wrath no more.
     Soft, bright, fierce, tender, fitful, truthful, sweet,
     A shrine where faith and change might smile and meet,
     A soul whose music could but shift its tune
     As when the lustrous year turns May to June
     And spring subsides in summer, so makes good
     Its perfect claim to very womanhood.
     The heart that hate of wrong made fire, the hand
     Whose touch was fire as keen as shame's own brand
     When fraud and treason, swift to smile and sting,
     Crowned and discrowned a tyrant, knave or king,
     False each and ravenous as the fitful sea,
     Grew gently glad as love that fear sets free.
     Like eddying ripples that the wind restrains,
     The bright words whisper music ere it wanes.
     Ere fades the sovereign sound of song that rang
     As though the sun to match the sea's tune sang,
     When noon from dawn took life and light, and time
     Shone, seeing how Shakespeare made the world sublime,
     Ere sinks the wind whose breath was heaven's and day's,
     The sunset's witness gives the sundawn praise.




     PROLOGUE TO THE SPANISH GIPSY


     The wind that brings us from the springtide south
     Strange music as from love's or life's own mouth
     Blew hither, when the blast of battle ceased
     That swept back southward Spanish prince and priest,
     A sound more sweet than April's flower-sweet rain,
     And bade bright England smile on pardoned Spain.
     The land that cast out Philip and his God
     Grew gladly subject where Cervantes trod.
     Even he whose name above all names on earth
     Crowns England queen by grace of Shakespeare's birth
     Might scarce have scorned to smile in God's wise down
     And gild with praise from heaven an earthlier crown.
     And he whose hand bade live down lengthening years
     Quixote, a name lit up with smiles and tears,
     Gave the glad watchword of the gipsies' life,
     Where fear took hope and grief took joy to wife.
     Times change, and fame is fitful as the sea:
     But sunset bids not darkness always be,
     And still some light from Shakespeare and the sun
     Burns back the cloud that masks not Middleton.
     With strong swift strokes of love and wrath he drew
     Shakespearean London's loud and lusty crew:
     No plainer might the likeness rise and stand
     When Hogarth took his living world in hand.
     No surer then his fire-fledged shafts could hit,
     Winged with as forceful and as faithful wit:
     No truer a tragic depth and heat of heart
     Glowed through the painter's than the poet's art.
     He lit and hung in heaven the wan fierce moon
     Whose glance kept time with witchcraft's air-struck tune:
     He watched the doors where loveless love let in
     The pageant hailed and crowned by death and sin:
     He bared the souls where love, twin-born with hate,
     Made wide the way for passion-fostered fate.
     All English-hearted, all his heart arose
     To scourge with scorn his England's cowering foes:
     And Rome and Spain, who bade their scorner be
     Their prisoner, left his heart as England's free.
     Now give we all we may of all his due
     To one long since thus tried and found thus true.




     PROLOGUE TO THE TWO NOBLE KINSMEN


     Sweet as the dewfall, splendid as the south,
     Love touched with speech Boccaccio's golden mouth,
     Joy thrilled and filled its utterance full with song,
     And sorrow smiled on doom that wrought no wrong.
     A starrier lustre of lordlier music rose
     Beyond the sundering bar of seas and snows
     When Chaucer's thought took life and light from his
     And England's crown was one with Italy's.
     Loftiest and last, by grace of Shakespeare's word,
     Arose above their quiring spheres a third,
     Arose, and flashed, and faltered: song's deep sky
     Saw Shakespeare pass in light, in music die.
     No light like his, no music, man might give
     To bid the darkened sphere, left songless, live.
     Soft though the sound of Fletcher's rose and rang
     And lit the lunar darkness as it sang,
     Below the singing stars the cloud-crossed moon
     Gave back the sunken sun's a trembling tune.
     As when at highest high tide the sovereign sea
     Pauses, and patience doubts if passion be,
     Till gradual ripples ebb, recede, recoil,
     Shine, smile, and whisper, laughing as they toil,
     Stark silence fell, at turn of fate's high tide,
     Upon his broken song when Shakespeare died,
     Till Fletcher's light sweet speech took heart to say
     What evening, should it speak for morning, may.
     And fourfold now the gradual glory shines
     That shows once more in heaven two twinborn signs,
     Two brethren stars whose light no cloud may fret,
     No soul whereon their story dawns forget.




     THE AFTERGLOW OF SHAKESPEARE


     Let there be light, said Time: and England heard:
     And manhood grew to godhead at the word.
     No light had shone, since earth arose from sleep,
     So far; no fire of thought had cloven so deep.
     A day beyond all days bade life acclaim
     Shakespeare: and man put on his crowning name.
     All secrets once through darkling ages kept
     Shone, sang, and smiled to think how long they slept.
     Man rose past fear of lies whereon he trod:
     And Dante's ghost saw hell devour his God.
     Bright Marlowe, brave as winds that brave the sea
     When sundawn bids their bliss in battle be,
     Lit England first along the ways whereon
     Song brighter far than sunlight soared and shone.
     He died ere half his life had earned his right
     To lighten time with song's triumphant light.
     Hope shrank, and felt the stroke at heart: but one
     She knew not rose, a man to match the sun.
     And England's hope and time's and man's became
     Joy, deep as music's heart and keen as flame.
     Not long, for heaven on earth may live not long,
     Light sang, and darkness died before the song.
     He passed, the man above all men, whose breath
     Transfigured life with speech that lightens death.
     He passed: but yet for many a lustrous year
     His light of song bade England shine and hear.
     As plague and fire and faith in falsehood spread,
     So from the man of men, divine and dead,
     Contagious godhead, seen, unknown, and heard,
     Fulfilled and quickened England; thought and word,
     When men would fain set life to music, grew
     More sweet than years which knew not Shakespeare knew.
     The simplest soul that set itself to song
     Sang, and may fear not time's or change's wrong.
     The lightest eye that glanced on life could see
     Through grief and joy the God that man might be.
     All passion whence the living soul takes fire
     Till death fulfil despair and quench desire,
     All love that lightens through the cloud of chance,
     All hate that lurks in hope and smites askance,
     All holiness of sorrow, all divine
     Pity, whose tears are stars that save and shine,
     All sunbright strength of laughter like the sea's
     When spring and autumn loose their lustrous breeze,
     All sweet, all strange, all sad, all glorious things,
     Lived on his lips, and hailed him king of kings.
     All thought, all strife, all anguish, all delight,
     Spake all he bade, and speak till day be night.
     No soul that heard, no spirit that beheld,
     Knew not the God that lured them and compelled.
     On Beaumont's brow the sun arisen afar
     Shed fire which lit through heaven the younger star
     That sank before the sunset: one dark spring
     Slew first the kinglike subject, then the king.
     The glory left above their graves made strong
     The heart of Fletcher, till the flower-sweet song
     That Shakespeare culled from Chaucer's field, and died,
     Found ending on his lips that smiled and sighed.
     From Dekker's eyes the light of tear-touched mirth
     Shone as from Shakespeare's, mingling heaven and earth.
     Wild witchcraft's lure and England's love made one
     With Shakespeare's heart the heart of Middleton.
     Harsh, homely, true, and tragic, Rowley told
     His heart's debt down in rough and radiant gold.
     The skies that Tourneur's lightning clove and rent
     Flamed through the clouds where Shakespeare's thunder went.
     Wise Massinger bade kings be wise in vain
     Ere war bade song, storm-stricken, cower and wane.
     Kind Heywood, simple-souled and single-eyed,
     Found voice for England's home-born praise and pride.
     Strange grief, strange love, strange terror, bared the sword
     That smote the soul by grace and will of Ford.
     The stern grim strength of Chapman's thought found speech
     Loud as when storm at ebb-tide rends the beach:
     And all the honey brewed from flowers in May
     Made sweet the lips and bright the dreams of Day.
     But even as Shakespeare caught from Marlowe's word
     Fire, so from his the thunder-bearing third,
     Webster, took light and might whence none but he
     Hath since made song that sounded so the sea
     Whose waves are lives of men--whose tidestream rolls
     From year to darkening year the freight of souls.
     Alone above it, sweet, supreme, sublime,
     Shakespeare attunes the jarring chords of time;
     Alone of all whose doom is death and birth,
     Shakespeare is lord of souls alive on earth.




     CLEOPATRA

     "Her beauty might outface the jealous hours,
     Turn shame to love and pain to a tender sleep,
     And the strong nerve of hate to sloth and tears;
     Make spring rebellious in the sides of frost,
     Thrust out lank winter with hot August growths,
     Compel sweet blood into the husks of death,
     And from strange beasts enforce harsh courtesy."

                      T. HAYMAN, _Fall of Antony_, 1655.




     CLEOPATRA


     I

     Her mouth is fragrant as a vine,
       A vine with birds in all its boughs;
     Serpent and scarab for a sign
       Between the beauty of her brows
     And the amorous deep lids divine.


     II

     Her great curled hair makes luminous
       Her cheeks, her lifted throat and chin
     Shall she not have the hearts of us
       To shatter, and the loves therein
     To shred between her fingers thus?


     III

     Small ruined broken strays of light,
       Pearl after pearl she shreds them through
     Her long sweet sleepy fingers, white
       As any pearl's heart veined with blue,
     And soft as dew on a soft night.


     IV

     As if the very eyes of love
       Shone through her shutting lids, and stole
     The slow looks of a snake or dove;
       As if her lips absorbed the whole
     Of love, her soul the soul thereof.


     V

     Lost, all the lordly pearls that were
       Wrung from the sea's heart, from the green
     Coasts of the Indian gulf-river;
       Lost, all the loves of the world--so keen
     Towards this queen for love of her.


     VI

     You see against her throat the small
       Sharp glittering shadows of them shake;
     And through her hair the imperial
       Curled likeness of the river snake,
     Whose bite shall make an end of all.


     VII

     Through the scales sheathing him like wings,
       Through hieroglyphs of gold and gem,
     The strong sense of her beauty stings,
       Like a keen pulse of love in them,
     A running flame through all his rings.


     VIII

     Under those low large lids of hers
       She hath the histories of all time;
     The fruit of foliage-stricken years;
       The old seasons with their heavy chime
     That leaves its rhyme in the world's ears.


     IX

     She sees the hand of death made bare,
       The ravelled riddle of the skies,
     The faces faded that were fair,
       The mouths made speechless that were wise,
     The hollow eyes and dusty hair;


     X

     The shape and shadow of mystic things,
       Things that fate fashions or forbids;
     The staff of time-forgotten Kings
       Whose name falls off the Pyramids,
     Their coffin-lids and grave-clothings;


     XI

     Dank dregs, the scum of pool or clod,
       God-spawn of lizard-footed clans,
     And those dog-headed hulks that trod
       Swart necks of the old Egyptians,
     Raw draughts of man's beginning God;


     XII

     The poised hawk, quivering ere he smote,
       With plume-like gems on breast and back;
     The asps and water-worms afloat
       Between the rush-flowers moist and slack;
     The cat's warm black bright rising throat.


     XIII

     The purple days of drouth expand
       Like a scroll opened out again;
     The molten heaven drier than sand,
       The hot red heaven without rain,
     Sheds iron pain on the empty land.


     XIV

     All Egypt aches in the sun's sight;
       The lips of men are harsh for drouth,
     The fierce air leaves their cheeks burnt white,
       Charred by the bitter blowing south,
     Whose dusty mouth is sharp to bite.


     XV

     All this she dreams of, and her eyes
       Are wrought after the sense hereof.
     There is no heart in her for sighs;
       The face of her is more than love--
     A name above the Ptolemies.


     XVI

     Her great grave beauty covers her
       As that sleek spoil beneath her feet
     Clothed once the anointed soothsayer;
       The hallowing is gone forth from it
     Now, made unmeet for priests to wear.


     XVII

     She treads on gods and god-like things,
       On fate and fear and life and death,
     On hate that cleaves and love that clings,
       All that is brought forth of man's breath
     And perisheth with what it brings.


     XVIII

     She holds her future close, her lips
       Hold fast the face of things to be;
     Actium, and sound of war that dips
       Down the blown valleys of the sea,
     Far sails that flee, and storms of ships;


     XIX

     The laughing red sweet mouth of wine
       At ending of life's festival;
     That spice of cerecloths, and the fine
       White bitter dust funereal
     Sprinkled on all things for a sign;


     XX

     His face, who was and was not he,
       In whom, alive, her life abode;
     The end, when she gained heart to see
       Those ways of death wherein she trod,
     Goddess by god, with Antony.




     DEDICATION




     DEDICATION


     The sea that is life everlasting
       And death everlasting as life
     Abides not a pilot's forecasting,
       Foretells not of peace or of strife.
     The might of the night that was hidden
       Arises and darkens the day,
     A glory rebuked and forbidden,
       Time's crown, and his prey.

     No sweeter, no kindlier, no fairer,
       No lovelier a soul from its birth
     Wore ever a brighter and rarer
       Life's raiment for life upon earth
     Than his who enkindled and cherished
       Art's vestal and luminous flame,
     That dies not when kingdoms have perished
       In storm or in shame.

     No braver, no trustier, no purer,
       No stronger and clearer a soul
     Bore witness more splendid and surer
       For manhood found perfect and whole
     Since man was a warrior and dreamer
       Than his who in hatred of wrong
     Would fain have arisen a redeemer
       By sword or by song.

     Twin brethren in spirit, immortal
       As art and as love, which were one
     For you from the birthday whose portal
       First gave you to sight of the sun,
     To-day nor to-night nor to-morrow
       May bring you again from above,
     Drawn down by the spell of the sorrow
       Whose anguish is love.

     No light rearising hereafter
       Shall lighten us here as of old
     When seasons were lustrous as laughter
       Of waves that are snowshine and gold.
     The dawn that imbues and enkindles
       Life's fluctuant and fugitive sea
     Dies down as the starshine that dwindles
       And cares not to be.

     Men, mightier than death which divides us,
       Friends, dearer than sorrow can say,
     The light that is darkness and hides us
       Awhile from each other away
     Abides but awhile and endures not,
       We know, though the day be as night,
     For souls that forgetfulness lures not
       Till sleep be in sight.

     The sleep that enfolds you, the slumber
       Supreme and eternal on earth,
     Whence ages of numberless number
       Shall bring us not back into birth,
     We know not indeed if it be not
       What no man hath known if it be,
     Life, quickened with light that we see not
       If spirits may see.

     The love that would see and would know it
       Is even as the love of a child.
     But the fire of the fame of the poet
       Who gazed on the past, and it smiled,
     But the light of the fame of the painter
       Whose hand was as morning's in May,
     Death bids not be darker or fainter,
       Time casts not away.

     We, left of them loveless and lonely,
       Who lived in the light of their love,
     Whose darkness desires it, we only,
       Who see them afar and above,
     So far, if we die not, above us,
       So lately no dearer than near,
     May know not of death if they love us,
       Of night if they hear.

     We, stricken and darkling and living,
       Who loved them and love them, abide
     A day, and the gift of its giving,
       An hour, and the turn of its tide,
     When twilight and midnight and morrow
       Shall pass from the sight of the sun,
     And death be forgotten, and sorrow
       Discrowned and undone.

     For us as for these will the breathless
       Brief minute arise and pass by:
     And if death be not utterly deathless,
       If love do not utterly die,
     From the life that is quenched as an ember
       The soul that aspires as a flame
     Can choose not but wholly remember
       Love, lovelier than fame.

     Though sure be the seal of their glory
       And fairer no fame upon earth,
     Though never a leaf shall grow hoary
       Of the crowns that were given them at birth,
     While time as a vassal doth duty
       To names that he towers not above,
     More perfect in price and in beauty
       For ever is love.

     The night is upon us, and anguish
       Of longing that yearns for the dead.
     But mourners that faint not or languish,
       That veil not and bow not the head,
     Take comfort to heart if a token
       Be given them of comfort to be:
     While darkness on earth is unbroken,
       Light lives on the sea.


PRINTED BY SPOTTISWOODE, BALLANTYNE AND CO. LTD.

LONDON, COLCHESTER AND ETON





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of A Channel Passage and Other Poems, by 
Algernon Charles Swinburne

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK A CHANNEL PASSAGE AND OTHER POEMS ***

***** This file should be named 18871-8.txt or 18871-8.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/1/8/8/7/18871/

Produced by Paul Murray, Lisa Reigel, and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


﻿The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Heptalogia, by Algernon Charles Swinburne

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Heptalogia

Author: Algernon Charles Swinburne

Release Date: April 19, 2006 [EBook #18210]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE HEPTALOGIA ***




Produced by Paul Murray, Diane Monico, and the Project
Gutenberg Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net









THE HEPTALOGIA

By Algernon Charles Swinburne

Taken from THE COLLECTED POETICAL WORKS
OF ALGERNON CHARLES SWINBURNE, VOL. V




SWINBURNE'S POETICAL WORKS


I. POEMS AND BALLADS (First Series).

II. SONGS BEFORE SUNRISE, and SONGS OF TWO NATIONS.

III. POEMS AND BALLADS (Second and Third Series), and SONGS OF THE
       SPRINGTIDES.

IV. TRISTRAM OF LYONESSE, THE TALE OF BALEN, ATALANTA IN CALYDON,
       ERECHTHEUS.

V. STUDIES IN SONG, A CENTURY OF ROUNDELS, SONNETS ON ENGLISH DRAMATIC
       POETS, THE HEPTALOGIA, ETC.

VI. A MIDSUMMER HOLIDAY, ASTROPHEL, A CHANNEL PASSAGE AND OTHER POEMS.


LONDON: WILLIAM HEINEMANN




THE
HEPTALOGIA

By

Algernon Charles Swinburne

1917

LONDON: WILLIAM HEINEMANN




_First printed (Chatto), 1904
Reprinted 1904, '09, '10, '12
(Heinemann), 1917_

_London: William Heinemann, 1917_

       *       *       *       *       *




THE HEPTALOGIA

THE HIGHER PANTHEISM IN A NUTSHELL      373

JOHN JONES'S WIFE                       375

THE POET AND THE WOODLOUSE              396

THE PERSON OF THE HOUSE                 400

LAST WORDS OF A SEVENTH-RATE POET       406

SONNET FOR A PICTURE                    421

NEPHELIDIA                              422

       *       *       *       *       *




SPECIMENS OF MODERN POETS

THE HEPTALOGIA

OR

THE SEVEN AGAINST SENSE

A CAP WITH SEVEN BELLS




THE HIGHER PANTHEISM
IN A NUTSHELL


One, who is not, we see: but one, whom we see not, is:
Surely this is not that: but that is assuredly this.

What, and wherefore, and whence? for under is over and under:
If thunder could be without lightning, lightning could be without thunder.

Doubt is faith in the main: but faith, on the whole, is doubt:
We cannot believe by proof: but could we believe without?

Why, and whither, and how? for barley and rye are not clover:
Neither are straight lines curves: yet over is under and over.

Two and two may be four: but four and four are not eight:
Fate and God may be twain: but God is the same thing as fate.

Ask a man what he thinks, and get from a man what he feels:
God, once caught in the fact, shows you a fair pair of heels.

Body and spirit are twins: God only knows which is which:
The soul squats down in the flesh, like a tinker drunk in a ditch.

More is the whole than a part: but half is more than the whole:
Clearly, the soul is the body: but is not the body the soul?

One and two are not one: but one and nothing is two:
Truth can hardly be false, if falsehood cannot be true.

Once the mastodon was: pterodactyls were common as cocks:
Then the mammoth was God: now is He a prize ox.

Parallels all things are: yet many of these are askew:
You are certainly I: but certainly I am not you.

Springs the rock from the plain, shoots the stream from the rock:
Cocks exist for the hen: but hens exist for the cock.

God, whom we see not, is: and God, who is not, we see:
Fiddle, we know, is diddle: and diddle, we take it, is dee.

       *       *       *       *       *




JOHN JONES'S WIFE


I

AT THE PIANO


I

Love me and leave me; what love bids retrieve me? can June's fist
    grasp May?
Leave me and love me; hopes eyed once above me like spring's sprouts
    decay;
Fall as the snow falls, when summer leaves grow false--cards packed
    for storm's play!


II

Nay, say Decay's self be but last May's elf, wing shifted, eye sheathed--
Changeling in April's crib rocked, who lets 'scape rills locked fast
    since frost breathed--
Skin cast (think!) adder-like, now bloom bursts bladder-like,--bloom
    frost bequeathed?


III

Ah, how can fear sit and hear as love hears it grief's heart's cracked
    grate's screech?
Chance lets the gate sway that opens on hate's way and shews on shame's
    beach
Crouched like an imp sly change watch sweet love's shrimps lie, a
    toothful in each.

IV

Time feels his tooth slip on husks wet from Truth's lip, which drops
    them and grins--
Shells where no throb stirs of life left in lobsters since joy thrilled
    their fins--
Hues of the prawn's tail or comb that makes dawn stale, so red for our
    sins!


V

Years blind and deaf use the soul's joys as refuse, heart's peace as
    manure,
Reared whence, next June's rose shall bloom where our moons rose last
    year, just as pure:
Moons' ends match roses' ends: men by beasts' noses' ends mete sin's
    stink's cure.


VI

Leaves love last year smelt now feel dead love's tears melt--flies
    caught in time's mesh!
Salt are the dews in which new time breeds new sin, brews blood and
    stews flesh;
Next year may see dead more germs than this weeded and reared them
    afresh.


VII

Old times left perish, there's new time to cherish; life just shifts
    its tune;
As, when the day dies, earth, half afraid, eyes the growth of the moon;
Love me and save me, take me or waive me; death takes one so soon!




II

BY THE CLIFF


I

Is it daytime (guess),
  You that feed my soul
    To excess
With that light in those eyes
  And those curls drawn like a scroll
In that round grave guise?
    No or yes?


II

Oh, the end, I'd say!
  Such a foolish thing
    (Pure girls' play!)
As a mere mute heart,
  Was it worth a kiss, a ring,
This? for two must part--
    Not to-day.


III

Look, the whole sand crawls,
  Hums, a heaving hive,
    Scrapes and scrawls--
Such a buzz and burst!
  Here just one thing's not alive,
One that was at first--
    But life palls.


IV

Yes, my heart, I know,
  Just my heart's stone dead--
    Yes, just so.
Sick with heat, those worms
  Drop down scorched and overfed--
No more need of germs!
    Let them go.


V

Yes, but you now, look,
  You, the rouged stage female
    With a crook,
Chalked Arcadian sham,
  You that made my soul's sleep's dream ail--
Your soul fit to damn?
    Shut the book.




III

ON THE SANDS


I

There was nothing at all in the case (conceive)
  But love; being love, it was not (understand)
Such a thing as the years let fall (believe)
  Like the rope's coil dropt from a fisherman's hand
When the boat's hauled up--"by your leave!"


II

So--well! How that crab writhes--leg after leg
  Drawn, as a worm draws ring upon ring
Gradually, not gladly! Chicken or egg,
  Is it more than the ransom (say) of a king
(Take my meaning at least) that I beg?


III

Not so! You were ready to learn, I think,
  What the world said! "He loves you too well (suppose)
For such leanings! These poets, their love's mere ink--
  Like a flower, their flame flashes--a rosebud, blows--
Then it all drops down at a wink!


IV

"Ah, the instance! A curl of a blossomless vine
  The vinedresser passing it sickens to see
And mutters 'Much hope (under God) of His wine
  From the branch and the bark of a barren tree
Spring reared not, and winter lets pine--


V

"'His wine that should glorify (saith He) the cup
  That a man beholding (not tasting) might say
"Pour out life at a draught, drain it dry, drink it up,
  Give this one thing, and huddle the rest away--
Save the bitch, and be hanged to the pup!"


VI

"'Let it rot then!' which saying, he leaves it--we'll guess,
  Feels (if the sap move at all) thus much--
Yearns, and would blossom, would quicken no less,
  Bud at an eye's glance, flower at a touch--
'Die, perhaps, would you not, for her?'--'Yes!'


VII

"Note the hitch there! That's piteous--so much being done,
  (He'll think some day, your lover) so little to do!
Such infinite days to wear out, once begun!
  Since the hand its glove holds, and the footsole its shoe--
Overhead too there's always the sun!"


VIII

Oh, no doubt they had said so, your friends--been profuse
  Of good counsel, wise hints--"where the trap lurks, walk warily--
Squeeze the fruit to the core ere you count on the juice!
  For the graft may fail, shift, wax, change colour, wane, vary, lie--"
You were cautious, God knows--to what use?


IX

This crab's wiser, it strikes me--no twist but implies life--
  Not a curl but's so fit you could find none fitter--
For the brute from its brutehood looks up thus and eyes life--
  Stoop your soul down and listen, you'll hear it twitter,
Laughing lightly,--my crab's life's the wise life!


X

Those who've read S. T. Coleridge remember how Sammy sighs
  To his pensive (I think he says) Sara--"most soothing-sweet"--
Crab's bulk's less (look!) than man's--yet (quoth Cancer) I am my size,
  And my bulk's girth contents me! Man's maw (see?) craves two things--
   wheat
And flesh likewise--man's gluttonous--damn his eyes!


XI

Crab's content with crab's provender: crab's love, if soothing,
  Is no sweeter than pincers are soft--and a new sickle
Cuts no sharper than crab's claws nip, keen as boar's toothing!
  Yet crab's love's no less fervent than bard's, if less musical--
'Tis a new thing I'd lilt--but a true thing.


XII

Old songs tell us, of all drinks for Englishmen fighting, ale's
  Out and out best: salt water contents crab, it seems to me,
Though pugnacious as sailors, and skilled to steer right in gales
  That craze pilots, if slow to sing--"Sleep'st thou? thou dream'st
    o' me!"
In such love-strains as mine--or a nightingale's.


XIII

Ah, now, look you--tail foremost, the beast sets seaward--
  The sea draws it, sand sucks it--he's wise, my crab!
From the napkin out jumps his one talent--good steward,
  Just judge! So a man shirks the smile or the stab,
And sets his sail duly to leeward!


XIV

Trust me? Hardly! I bid you not lean (remark)
  On my spirit, your spirit--my flesh, your flesh--
Hold my hand, and tread safe through the horrible dark--
  Quench my soul as with sprinklings of snow, then refresh
With some blast of new bellows the spark!


XV

By no means! This were easy (men tell me) to say--
  "Give her all, throw your chance up, fall back on her heart!"
(Say my friends) "she must change! after night follows day--"
  No such fool! I am safe set in hell, for my part--
So let heaven do the worst now he may!


XVI

What they bid me? Well, this, nothing more--"Tell her this--
  'You are mine, I yours, though the whole world fail--
Though things are not, I know there is one thing which is--
  Though the oars break, there's hope for us yet--hoist the sail!
Oh, your heart! what's the heart? but your kiss!'


XVII

"Then she breaks, she drops down, she lies flat at your feet--
  Take her then!" Well, I knew it--what fools are men!
Take the bee by her horns, will your honey prove sweet?
  Sweet is grass--will you pasture your cows in a fen?
Oh, if contraries could but once meet!


XVIII

Love you call it? Some twitch in the moon's face (observe),
  Wet blink of her eyelid, tear dropt about dewfall,
Cheek flushed or obscured--does it make the sky swerve?
  Fetch the test, work the question to rags, bring to proof all--
Find what souls want and bodies deserve!


XIX

Ah, we know you! Your soul works to infinite ends,
  Frets, uses life up for death's sake, takes pains,
Flings down love's self--"but you, bear me witness, my friends!
  Have I lost spring? count up (see) the winter's fresh gains!
Is the shrub spoilt? the pine's hair impends!"


XX

What, you'd say--"Mark how God works! Years crowd, time wears thin,
  Earth keeps good yet, the sun goes on, stars hold their own,
And you'll change, climb past sight of the world, shift your skin,
  Never heeding how life moans--'more flesh now, less bone!'
For that cheek's worn waste outline (death's grin)


XXI

"Pleads with time still--'what good if I lose this? but see--'"
  (There's the crab gone!) "'I said, "Though earth sinks,"'" (you perceive?
Ah, true, back there!) your soul now--"'"yet some vein might be
  (Could one find it alive in the heart's core's pulse, cleave
Through the life-springs where "you" melts in "me")--


XXII

"'"Some true vein of the absolute soul, which survives
  All that flesh runs to waste through"--and lo, this fails!
Here's death close on us! One life? a million of lives!
  Why choose one sail to watch of these infinite sails?
Time's a tennis-play? thank you, no, fives!


XXIII

"'Stop life's ball then!' Such folly! melt earth down for that,
  Till the pure ore eludes you and leaves you raw scoriæ?
Pish, the vein's wrong!" But you, friends--come, what were you at
  When God spat you out suddenly? what was the story He
Cut short thus, the growth He laid flat?


XXIV

Wait! the crab's twice alive, mark! Oh, worthy, your soul,
  Of strange ends, great results, novel labours! Take note,
I reject this for one! (ay, now, straight to the hole!
  Safe in sand there--your skirts smooth out all as they float!)
I, shirk drinking through flaws in the bowl?


XXV

Or suppose now that rock's cleft--grim, scored to the quick,
  As a man's face kept fighting all life through gets scored,
Mossed and marked with grey purulent leprosies, sick,
  Flat and foul as man's life here (be swift with your sword--
Cut the soul out, stuck fast where thorns prick!)


XXVI

--Say it let the rock's heart out, its meaning, the thing
  All was made for, devised, ruled out gradually, planned--
Ah, that sea-shell, perhaps--since it lies, such a ring
  Of pure colour, a cup full of sunbeams, to stand
(Say, in Lent) at the priest's hand--(no king!)


XXVII

Blame the cleft then? Praise rather! So--just a chance gone!
  Had you said--"Save the seed and secure souls in flower"--
Ah, how time laughs, years palpitate, pro grapples con,
  Till one day you shrug shoulders--"Well, gone, the good hour!"
Till one night--"Is God off now? or on?"




IV

UP THE SPOUT


I

Hi! Just you drop that! Stop, I say!
  Shirk work, think slink off, twist friend's wrist?
Where that spined sand's lined band's the bay--
  Lined blind with true sea's blue, as due--
Promising--not to pay?


II

For the sea's debt leaves wet the sand;
  Burst worst fate's weights in one burst gun?
A man's own yacht, blown--What? off land?
  Tack back, or veer round here, then--queer!
Reef points, though--understand?


III

I'm blest if I do. Sigh? be blowed!
  Love's doves make break life's ropes, eh? Tropes!
Faith's brig, baulked, sides caulked, rides at road;
  Hope's gropes befogged, storm-dogged and bogged--
Clogged, water-logged, her load!


IV

Stowed, by Jove, right and tight, away!
  No show now how best plough sea's brow,
Wrinkling--breeze quick, tease thick, ere day,
  Clear sheer wave's sheen of green, I mean,
With twinkling wrinkles--eh?


V

Sea sprinkles winkles, tinkles light
  Shells' bells--boy's joys that hap to snap!
It's just sea's fun, breeze done, to spite
  God's rods that scourge her surge, I'd urge--
Not proper, is it--quite?


VI

See, fore and aft, life's craft undone!
  Crank plank, split spritsail--mark, sea's lark!
That grey cold sea's old sprees, begun
  When men lay dark i' the ark, no spark,
All water--just God's fun!


VII

Not bright, at best, his jest to these
  Seemed--screamed, shrieked, wreaked on kin for sin!
When for mirth's yell earth's knell seemed please
  Some dumb new grim great whim in him
Made Jews take chalk for cheese.


VIII

Could God's rods bruise God's Jews? Their jowls
  Bobbed, sobbed, gaped, aped the plaice in face:
None heard, 'tis odds, his--God's--folk's howls.
  Now, how must I apply, to try
This hookiest-beaked of owls?


IX

Well, I suppose God knows--I don't.
  Time's crimes mark dark men's types, in stripes
Broad as fen's lands men's hands were wont
  Leave grieve unploughed, though proud and loud
With birds' words--No! he won't!


X

One never should think good impossible.
  Eh? say I'd hide this Jew's oil's cruse--
His shop might hold bright gold, engrossible
  By spy--spring's air takes there no care
To wave the heath-flower's glossy bell!


XI

But gold bells chime in time there, coined--
  Gold! Old Sphinx winks there--"Read my screed!"
Doctrine Jews learn, use, burn for, joined
  (Through new craft's stealth) with health and wealth--
At once all three purloined!


XII

I rose with dawn, to pawn, no doubt,
  (Miss this chance, glance untried aside?)
John's shirt, my--no! Ay, so--the lout!
  Let yet the door gape, store on floor
And not a soul about?


XIII

Such men lay traps, perhaps--and I'm
  Weak--meek--mild--child of woe, you know!
But theft, I doubt, my lout calls crime.
  Shrink? Think! Love's dawn in pawn--you spawn
Of Jewry! Just in time!




V

OFF THE PIER


I

One last glance at these sands and stones!
  Time goes past men, and lives to his liking,
Steals, and ruins, and sometimes atones.
  Why should he be king, though, and why not I king?
There now, that wind, like a swarm of sick drones!


II

Is it heaven or mere earth (come!) that moves so and moans?
  Oh, I knew, when you loved me, my soul was in flowerage--
Now the frost comes; from prime, though, I watched through to nones,
  Read love's litanies over--his age was not our age!
No more flutes in this world for me now, dear! trombones.


III

All that youth once denied and made mouths at, age owns.
  Facts put fangs out and bite us; life stings and grows viperous;
And time's fugues are a hubbub of meaningless tones.
  Once we followed the piper; now why not the piper us?
Love, grown grey, plays mere solos; we want antiphones.


IV

And we sharpen our wits up with passions for hones,
  Melt down loadstars for magnets, use women for whetstones,
Learn to bear with dead calms by remembering cyclones,
  Snap strings short with sharp thumbnails, till silence begets tones,
Burn our souls out, shift spirits, turn skins and change zones;


V

Then the heart, when all's done with, wakes, whimpers, intones
  Some lost fragment of tune it thought sweet ere it grew sick;
(Is it life that disclaims this, or death that disowns?)
  Mere dead metal, scrawled bars--ah, one touch, you make music!
Love's worth saving, youth doubts, but experience depones.


VI

In the darkness (right Dickens) of Tom-All-Alone's
  Or the Morgue out in Paris, where tragedy centuples
Life's effects by Death's algebra, Shakespeare (Malone's)
  Might have said sleep was murdered--new scholiasts have sent you pills
To purge text of him! Bread? give me--Scotticè--scones!


VII

Think, what use, when youth's saddle galls bay's back or roan's,
  To seek chords on love's keys to strike, other than his chords?
There's an error joy winks at and grief half condones,
  Or life's counterpoint grates the C major of discords--
'Tis man's choice 'twixt sluts rose-crowned and queens age dethrones.


VIII

I for instance might groan as a bag-pipe groans,
  Give the flesh of my heart for sharp sorrows to flagellate,
Grief might grind my cheeks down, age make sticks of my bones,
  (Though a queen drowned in tears must be worth more than Madge elate)[1]
Rose might turn burdock, and pine-apples cones;


IX

My skin might change to a pitiful crone's,
  My lips to a lizard's, my hair to weed,
My features, in fact, to a series of loans;
  Thus much is conceded; now, you, concede
You would hardly salute me by choice, John Jones?

[Footnote 1: First edition:--
And my face bear his brand--mine, that once bore Love's badge elate!]

       *       *       *       *       *




THE POET AND THE WOODLOUSE


Said a poet to a woodlouse--"Thou art certainly my brother;
  I discern in thee the markings of the fingers of the Whole;
And I recognize, in spite of all the terrene smut and smother,
  In the colours shaded off thee, the suggestions of a soul.

"Yea," the poet said, "I smell thee by some passive divination,
  I am satisfied with insight of the measure of thine house;
What had happened I conjecture, in a blank and rhythmic passion,
  Had the æons thought of making thee a man, and me a louse.

"The broad lives of upper planets, their absorption and digestion,
  Food and famine, health and sickness, I can scrutinize and test;
Through a shiver of the senses comes a resonance of question,
  And by proof of balanced answer I decide that I am best."

"Man, the fleshly marvel, alway feels a certain kind of awe stick
  To the skirts of contemplation, cramped with nympholeptic weight:
Feels his faint sense charred and branded by the touch of solar caustic,
  On the forehead of his spirit feels the footprint of a Fate."

"Notwithstanding which, O poet," spake the woodlouse, very blandly,
  "I am likewise the created,--I the equipoise of thee;
I the particle, the atom, I behold on either hand lie
  The inane of measured ages that were embryos of me.

"I am fed with intimations, I am clothed with consequences,
  And the air I breathe is coloured with apocalyptic blush:
Ripest-budded odours blossom out of dim chaotic stenches,
  And the Soul plants spirit-lilies in sick leagues of human slush.

"I am thrilled half cosmically through by cryptophantic surgings,
  Till the rhythmic hills roar silent through a spongious kind of blee:
And earth's soul yawns disembowelled of her pancreatic organs,
  Like a madrepore if mesmerized, in rapt catalepsy.

"And I sacrifice, a Levite--and I palpitate, a poet;--
  Can I close dead ears against the rush and resonance of things?
Symbols in me breathe and flicker up the heights of the heroic;
  Earth's worst spawn, you said, and cursed me? look! approve me! I
    have wings.

"Ah, men's poets! men's conventions crust you round and swathe you
    mist-like,
  And the world's wheels grind your spirits down the dust ye overtrod:
We stand sinlessly stark-naked in effulgence of the Christlight,
  And our polecat chokes not cherubs; and our skunk smells sweet to God.

"For He grasps the pale Created by some thousand vital handles,
  Till a Godshine, bluely winnowed through the sieve of thunderstorms,
Shimmers up the non-existent round the churning feet of angels;
  And the atoms of that glory may be seraphs, being worms.

"Friends, your nature underlies us and your pulses overplay us;
  Ye, with social sores unbandaged, can ye sing right and steer wrong?
For the transient cosmic, rooted in imperishable chaos,
  Must be kneaded into drastics as material for a song.

"Eyes once purged from homebred vapours through humanitarian passion
  See that monochrome a despot through a democratic prism;
Hands that rip the soul up, reeking from divine evisceration,
  Not with priestlike oil anoint him, but a stronger-smelling chrism.

"Pass, O poet, retransfigured! God, the psychometric rhapsode,
  Fills with fiery rhythms the silence, stings the dark with stars
    that blink;
All eternities hang round him like an old man's clothes collapsèd,
  While he makes his mundane music--AND HE WILL NOT STOP, I THINK."

       *       *       *       *       *




THE PERSON OF THE HOUSE

IDYL CCCLXVI

THE ACCOMPANIMENTS

1. THE MONTHLY NURSE
2. THE CAUDLE
3. THE SENTENCES

THE KID


1. THE MONTHLY NURSE

The sickly airs had died of damp;
  Through huddling leaves the holy chime
Flagged; I, expecting Mrs. Gamp,
  Thought--"Will the woman come in time?"
Upstairs I knew the matron bed
  Held her whose name confirms all joy
To me; and tremblingly I said,
  "Ah! will it be a girl or boy?"
And, soothed, my fluttering doubts began
  To sift the pleasantness of things;
Developing the unshapen man,
  An eagle baffled of his wings;
Considering, next, how fair the state
  And large the license that sublimes
A nineteenth-century female fate--
  Sweet cause that thralls my liberal rhymes!
And Chastities and colder Shames,
  Decorums mute and marvellous,
And fair Behaviour that reclaims
  All fancies grown erroneous,
Moved round me musing, till my choice
  Faltered. A female in a wig
Stood by me, and a drouthy voice
  Announced her--Mrs. Betsy Prig.


2. THE CAUDLE

Sweet Love that sways the reeling years,
  The crown and chief of certitudes,
For whose calm eyes and modest ears
  Time writes the rule and text of prudes--
That, surpliced, stoops a nuptial head,
  Nor chooses to live blindly free,
But, with all pulses quieted,
  Plays tunes of domesticity--
That Love I sing of and have sung
  And mean to sing till Death yawn sheer,
He rules the music of my tongue,
  Stills it or quickens, there or here.
I say but this: as we went up
  I heard the Monthly give a sniff
And "_if_ the big dog makes the pup--"
  She murmured--then repeated "if!"
The caudle on a slab was placed;
  She snuffed it, snorting loud and long;
I fled--I would not stop to taste--
  And dreamed all night of things gone wrong.


3. THE SENTENCES


I

Abortive Love is half a sin;
  But Love's abortions dearer far
Than wheels without an axle-pin
  Or life without a married star.


II

My rules are hard to understand
  For him whom sensual rules depress;
A bandbox in a midwife's hand
  May hold a costlier bridal dress.


III

"I like her not; in fact I loathe;
  Bugs hath she brought from London beds."
Friend! wouldst thou rather bear their growth
  Or have a baby with two heads?




IDYL CCCLXVI

THE KID

My spirit, in the doorway's pause,
  Fluttered with fancies in my breast;
Obsequious to all decent laws,
  I felt exceedingly distressed.
I knew it rude to enter there
  With Mrs. V. in such a state;
And, 'neath a magisterial air,
  Felt actually indelicate.
I knew the nurse began to grin;
  I turned to greet my Love. Said she--
"Confound your modesty, come in!
  --What shall we call the darling, V.?"
(There are so many charming names!
  Girls'--Peg, Moll, Doll, Fan, Kate, Blanche, Bab:
Boys'--Mahershahal-hashbaz, James,
  Luke, Nick, Dick, Mark, Aminadab.)

Lo, as the acorn to the oak,
  As well-heads to the river's height,
As to the chicken the moist yolk,
  As to high noon the day's first white--
Such is the baby to the man.
  There, straddling one red arm and leg,
Lay my last work, in length a span,
  Half hatched, and conscious of the egg.
A creditable child, I hoped;
  And half a score of joys to be
Through sunny lengths of prospect sloped
  Smooth to the bland futurity.
O, fate surpassing other dooms,
  O, hope above all wrecks of time!
O, light that fills all vanquished glooms,
  O, silent song o'ermastering rhyme!
I covered either little foot,
  I drew the strings about its waist;
Pink as the unshell'd inner fruit,
  But barely decent, hardly chaste,
Its nudity had startled me;
  But when the petticoats were on,
"I know," I said; "its name shall be
  Paul Cyril Athanasius John."
"Why," said my wife, "the child's a girl."
  My brain swooned, sick with failing sense;
With all perception in a whirl,
  How could I tell the difference?
"Nay," smiled the nurse, "the child's a boy."
  And all my soul was soothed to hear
That so it was: then startled Joy
  Mocked Sorrow with a doubtful tear.
And I was glad as one who sees
  For sensual optics things unmeet:
As purity makes passion freeze,
  So faith warns science off her beat.
Blessed are they that have not seen,
  And yet, not seeing, have believed:
To walk by faith, as preached the Dean,
  And not by sight, have I achieved.
Let love, that does not look, believe;
  Let knowledge, that believes not, look:
Truth pins her trust on falsehood's sleeve,
  While reason blunders by the book.
Then Mrs. Prig addressed me thus;
  "Sir, if you'll be advised by me,
You'll leave the blessed babe to us;
  It's my belief he wants his tea."

       *       *       *       *       *




LAST WORDS OF A SEVENTH-RATE POET

Bill, I feel far from quite right--if not further: already the pill
Seems, if I may say so, to bubble inside me. A poet's heart, Bill,
Is a sort of a thing that is made of the tenderest young bloom on a fruit.
You may pass me the mixture at once, if you please--and I'll thank you
    to boot
For that poem--and then for the julep. This really is damnable stuff!
(Not the poem, of course.) Do you snivel, old friend? well, it's nasty
    enough,
But I think I can stand it--I think so--ay, Bill, and I could were it
    worse.
But I'll tell you a thing that I can't and I won't. 'Tis the old, old
    curse--
The gall of the gold-fruited Eden, the lure of the angels that fell.
'Tis the core of the fruit snake-spotted in the hush of the shadows of
    hell,
Where a lost man sits with his head drawn down, and a weight on his eyes.
You know what I mean, Bill--the tender and delicate mother of lies,
Woman, the devil's first cousin--no doubt by the female side.
The breath of her mouth still moves in my hair, and I know that she lied,
And I feel her, Bill, sir, inside me--she operates there like a drug.
Were it better to live like a beetle, to wear the cast clothes of a slug,
Be the louse in the locks of the hangman, the mote in the eye of the bat,
Than to live and believe in a woman, who must one day grow aged and fat?
You must see it's preposterous, Bill, sir. And yet, how the thought of
    it clings!
I have lived out my time--I have prigged lots of verse--I have kissed
    (ah, that stings!)
Lips that swore I had cribbed every line that I wrote on them--cribbed--
    honour bright!
Then I loathed her; but now I forgive her; perhaps after all she was right.
Yet I swear it was shameful--unwomanly, Bill, sir--to say that I fibbed.
Why, the poems were mine, for I bought them in print. Cribbed? of course
    they were cribbed.
Yet I wouldn't say, cribbed from the French--Lady Bathsheba thought it
    was vulgar--
But picked up on the banks of the Don, from the lips of a highly
    intelligent Bulgar.
I'm aware, Bill, that's out of all metre--I can't help it--I'm none of
    your sort
Who set metres, by Jove, above morals--not exactly. They don't go to
    Court--
As I mentioned one night to that cowslip-faced pet, Lady Rahab Redrabbit
(Whom the Marquis calls Drabby for short). Well, I say, if you want a
    thing, grab it--
That's what I did, at least, when I took that _danseuse_ to a swell
    _cabaret_,
Where expense was no consideration. A poet, you see, now and then must
    be gay.
(I declined to give more, I remember, than fifty centeems to the waiter;
For I asked him if that was enough; and the jackanapes answered--
   _Peut-être_.
Ah, it isn't in you to draw up a _menu_ such as ours was, though humble:
When I told Lady Shoreditch, she thought it a regular _grand tout
    ensemble_.)
She danced the heart out of my body--I can see in the glare of the lights,
I can see her again as I saw her that evening, in spangles and tights.
When I spoke to her first, her eye flashed so, I heard--as I
    fancied--the spark whiz
From her eyelid--I said so next day to that jealous old fool of a Marquis.
She reminded me, Bill, of a lovely volcano, whose entrails are lava--
Or (you know my _penchant_ for original types) of the upas in Java.
In the curve of her sensitive nose was a singular species of dimple,
Where the flush was the mark of an angel's creased kiss--if it wasn't
    a pimple.
Now I'm none of your bashful John Bulls who don't know a pilau from a
    puggaree
Nor a chili, by George, from a chopstick. So, sir, I marched into her
    snuggery,
And proposed a light supper by way of a finish. I treated her, Bill,
To six _entrées_ of ortolans, sprats, maraschino, and oysters. It made
    her quite ill.
Of which moment of sickness I took some advantage. I held her like this,
And availed myself, sir, of her sneezing, to shut up her lips with a kiss.
The waiters, I saw, were quite struck; and I felt, I may say, _entre nous_,
Like Don Juan, Lauzun, Almaviva, Lord Byron, and old Richelieu.
(You'll observe, Bill, that rhyme's quite Parisian; a Londoner, sir,
    would have cited old Q.
People tell me the French in my verses recalls that of Jeames or John
    Thomas: I
Must maintain it's as good as the average accent of British diplomacy.)
These are moments that thrill the whole spirit with spasms that excite
    and exalt.
I stood more than the peer of the great Casanova--you know--de Seingalt.
She was worth, sir, I say it without hesitation, two brace of her sisters.
Ah, why should all honey turn rhubarb--all cherries grow onions--all
    kisses leave blisters?
Oh, and why should I ask myself questions? I've heard such before--once
    or twice.
Ah, I can't understand it--but, O, I imagine it strikes me as nice.
There's a deity shapes us our ends, sir, rough-hew them, my boy, how
    we will--
As I stated myself in a poem I published last year, you know, Bill--
Where I mentioned that that was the question--to be, or, by Jove, not
    to be.
Ah, it's something--you'll think so hereafter--to wait on a poet like me.
Had I written no more than those verses on that Countess I used to
    call Pussy--
Yes, Minette or Manon--and--you'll hardly believe it--she said they
    were all out of Musset.
Now I don't say they weren't--but what then? and I don't say they
    were--I'll bet pounds against pennies on
The subject--I wish I may never die Laureate, if some of them weren't
    out of Tennyson.
And I think--I don't like to be certain, with Death, so to speak, by
    me, frowning--
But I think there were some--say a dozen, perhaps, or a score--out of
    Browning.
And--though God knows his poems are not (as all mine are, sir) perfumed
    with orris--
Or at least with patchouli--I wouldn't be sworn there were none out of
    Morris.
And it's possible--only the legend of Circe is quite an old yarn--old
As the hills--that I might have been thinking, perhaps, of a poem by Arnold
When I sang how Ulysses--Odysseus I mean--would have yearned to dishevel
    her
Bright hair with his kisses, and painted myself at her feet--a Strayed
    Reveller.
As for poets who go on a contrary tack to what I go and you go--
You remember my lyrics _translated_--like "sweet bully Bottom"--from Hugo?
Though I will say it's curious that simply on just that account there
    should be
Men so bold as to say that not one of my poems was written by me.
It would stir the political bile or the physical spleen of a drab or a Tory
To hear critics disputing my claim to Empedocles, Maud, and the Laboratory.
Yes, it's singular--nay, I can't think of a parallel (ain't it a high lark?
As that Countess would say)--there are few men believe it was I wrote the
    Ode to a Skylark.
And it often has given myself and Lord Albert no end of diversion
To hear fellows maintain to my face it was Wordsworth who wrote the
    Excursion,
When they know that whole reams of the verses recur in my authorized works
Here and there, up and down! Why, such readers are infidels--heretics--
   Turks.
And the pitiful critics who think in their paltry presumption to pay me a
Pretty compliment, pairing me off, sir, with Keats--as if _he_ could
    write Lamia!
While I never produced a more characteristic and exquisite book,
One that gave me more real satisfaction, than did, on the whole, Lalla
    Rookh.
Was it there that I called on all debtors, being pestered myself by a
    creditor, (he
Isn't paid yet) to rise, by the proud appellation of bondsmen--hereditary?
Yes--I think so. And yet, on my word, I can't think why I think it was so.
It more probably was in the poem I made a few seasons ago
On that Duchess--her name now? ah, thus one outlives a whole cycle of joys!
Fair supplants black and brown succeeds golden. The poem made rather a
    noise.
And indeed I have seen worse verses; but as for the woman, my friend--
Though his neck had been never so stiff, she'd have made a philosopher
    bend.
As the broken heart of a sunset that bleeds pure purple and gold
In the shudder and swoon of the sickness of colour, the agonies old
That engirdle the brows of the day when he sinks with a spasm into rest
And the splash of his kingly blood is dashed on the skirts of the west,
Even such was my own, when I felt how much sharper than any snake's tooth
Was the passion that made me mistake Lady Eve for her niece Lady Ruth.
The whole world, colourless, lapsed. Earth fled from my feet like a dream,
And the whirl of the walls of Space was about me, and moved as a stream
Flowing and ebbing and flowing all night to a weary tune
("Such as that of my verses"? Get out!) in the face of a sick-souled moon.
The keen stars kindled and faded and fled, and the wind in my ears
Was the wail of a poet for failure--you needn't come snivelling tears
And spoiling the mixture, confound you, with dropping your tears into that!
I know I'm pathetic--I must be--and you soft-hearted and fat,
And I'm grateful of course for your kindness--there, don't come hugging
    me, now--
But because a fellow's pathetic, you needn't low like a cow.

  I should like--on my soul, I should like--to remember--but somehow I
    can't--
If the lady whose love has reduced me to this was the niece or the aunt.
But whichever it was, I feel sure, when I published my lays of last year
(You remember their title--The Tramp--only seven-and-sixpence--not dear),
I sent her a copy (perhaps her tears fell on the title-page--yes--
I should like to imagine she wept)--and the Bride of Bulgaria (MS.)
I forwarded with it. The lyrics, no doubt, she found bitter--and sweet;
But the Bride she rejected, you know, with expressions I will not repeat.
Well--she did no more than all publishers did. Though my prospects were
    marred,
I can pity and pardon them. Blindness, mere blindness! And yet it was hard.
For a poet, Bill, is a blossom--a bird--a billow--a breeze--
A kind of creature that moves among men as a wind among trees.
And a bard who is also the pet of patricians and dowagers doubly can
Express his contempt for canaille in his fables where beasts are
    republican.
Yet with all my disdainful forgiveness for men so deficient in _ton_
I cannot but feel it was cruel--I cannot but think it was wrong.
I with the heat of my heart still burning against all bars
As the fire of the dawn, so to speak, in the blanched blank brows of
    the stars--
I with my tremulous lips made pale by musical breath--
I with the shade in my eyes that was left by the kisses of Death--
(For Death came near me in youth, and touched my face with his face,
And put in my lips the songs that belong to a desolate place--
Desolate truly, my heart and my lips, till her kiss filled them up!)
I with my soul like wine poured out with my flesh for the cup--
It was hard for me--it was hard--Bill, Bill, you great owl, was it not?
For the day creeps in like a Fate: and I think my grand passion is rot:
And I dreamily seem to perceive, by the light of a life's dream done,
The lotion at six, and the mixture at ten, and the draught before one.

  Yes--I feel rather better. Man's life is a mull, at the best;
And the patent perturbator pills are like bullets of lead in my chest.
When a man's whole spirit is like the lost Pleiad, a blown-out star,
Is there comfort in Holloway, Bill? is there hope of salvation in Parr?
True, most things work to their end--and an end that the shroud overlaps.
Under lace, under silk, under gold, sir, the skirt of a winding-sheet
    flaps--
Which explains, if you think of it, Bill, why I can't, though my soul
    thereon broodeth,
Quite make out if I loved Lady Tamar as much as I loved Lady Judith.
Yet her dress was of violet velvet, her hair was hyacinth-hued,
And her ankles--no matter. A face where the music of every mood
Was touched by the tremulous fingers of passionate feeling, and made
Strange melodies, scornful, but sweeter than strings whereon sorrow has
    played
To enrapture the hearing of mirth when his garland of blossom and green
Turns to lead on the anguished forehead--"you don't understand what I
    mean"?
Well, of course I knew you were stupid--you always were stupid at school--
Now don't say you weren't--but I'm hanged if I thought you were quite
    such a fool!
You don't see the point of all this? I was talking of sickness and death--
In that poem I made years ago, I said this--"Love, the flower-time
    whose breath
Smells sweet through a summer of kisses and perfumes an autumn of tears
Is sadder at root than a winter--its hopes heavy-hearted like fears.
Though I love your Grace more than I love little Letty, the maid of
    the mill,
Yet the heat of your lips when I kiss them" (you see we were intimate,
    Bill)
"And the beat of the delicate blood in your eyelids of azure and white
Leave the taste of the grave in my mouth and the shadow of death on my
    sight.
Fill the cup--twine the chaplet--come into the garden--get out of the
    house--
Drink to _me_ with your eyes--there's a banquet behind, where worms
    only carouse!
As I said to sweet Katie, who lived by the brook on the land Philip
    farmed--
Worms shall graze where my kisses found pasture!" The Duchess, I may
    say, was charmed.
It was read to the Duke, and he cried like a child. If you'll give me
    a pill,
I'll go on till past midnight. That poem was said to be--Somebody's, Bill.
But you see you can always be sure of my hand as the mother that bore me
By the fact that I never write verse which has never been written
    before me.
Other poets--I blush for them, Bill--may adore and repudiate in turn a
Libitina, perhaps, or Pandemos; my Venus, you know, is Laverna.
Nay, that epic of mine which begins from foundations the Bible is
    built on--
"Of man's _first_ disobedience"--I've heard it attributed, dammy, to
    Milton.
Well, it's lucky for them that it's not worth my while, as I may say,
    to break spears
With the hirelings, forsooth, of the press who assert that Othello was
    Shakespeare's.
When he that can run, sir, may read--if he borrows the book, or goes
    on tick--
In my poems the bit that describes how the Hellespont joins the Propontic.
There are men, I believe, who will tell you that Gray wrote the whole
    of The Bard--
Or that I didn't write half the Elegy, Bill, in a Country Churchyard.
When you know that my poem, The Poet, begins--"Ruin seize thee!" and ends
With recapitulations of horrors the poet invokes on his friends.
And I'll swear, if you look at the dirge on my relatives under the turf,
    you
Will perceive it winds up with some lines on myself--and begins with
    the curfew.
Now you'll grant it's more probable, Bill--as a man of the world, if
    you please--
That all these should have prigged from myself than that I should have
    prigged from all these.
I could cry when I think of it, friend, if such tears would comport
    with my dignity,
That the author of Christabel ever should smart from such vulgar malignity.
(You remember perhaps that was one of the first little things that I
    carolled
After finishing Marmion, the Princess, the Song of the Shirt, and
    Childe Harold.)
Oh, doubtless it always has been so--Ah, doubtless it always will be--
There are men who would say that myself is a different person from me.
Better the porridge of patience a poor man snuffs in his plate
Than the water of poisonous laurels distilled by the fingers of hate.

  'Tis a dark-purple sort of a moonlighted kind of a midnight, I know;
You remember those verses I wrote on Irene, from Edgar A. Poe?
It was Lady Aholibah Levison, daughter of old Lord St. Giles,
Who inspired those delectable strains, and rewarded her bard with her
    smiles.
There are tasters who've sipped of Castalia, who don't look on _my_
    brew as _the_ brew:
There are fools who can't think why the names of my heroines of title
    should always be Hebrew.
'Twas my comrade, Sir Alister Knox, said, "Noo, dinna ye fash wi'
    Apollo, mon;
Gang to Jewry for wives and for concubines, lad--look at David and
    Solomon.
And it gives an erotico-scriptural twang," said that high-born young
    man, "--tickles
The lug" (he meant ear) "of the reader--to throw in a touch of the
    Canticles."
So I versified half of The Preacher--it took me a week, working slowly.
    Bah!
You don't half know the sex, Bill--they like it. And what if her name
    was Aholibah?
I recited her charms, in conjunction with those of a girl at the _café_,
In a poem I published in collaboration with Templeton (Taffy).
There are prudes in a world full of envy--and some of them thought it
    too strong
To compare an earl's daughter by name with a girl at a French _restaurant_.
I regarded her, though, with the chivalrous eyes of a knight-errant on
    quest;
I may say I don't know that I ever felt prouder, old friend, of a conquest.
And when _I_'ve been made happy, I never have cared a brass farthing who
    knew it; I
Thank my stars I'm as free from mock-modesty, friend, as from vulgar
    fatuity.
I can't say if my spirit retains--for the subject appears to me misty--any
    tie
To such associations as Poesy weaves round the records of Christianity.
There are bards--I may be one myself--who delight in their skill to unlock
    a lip's
Rosy secrets by kisses and whispers of texts from the charming Apocalypse.
It was thus that I won, by such biblical pills of poetical manna,
From two elders--Sir Seth and Lord Isaac--the liking of Lady Susanna.
But I left her--a woman to me is no more than a match, sir, at tennis is--
When I heard she'd gone off with my valet, and burnt my rhymed version
    of Genesis.
You may see by my shortness of speech that my time's almost up: I perceive
That my new-fangled brevity strikes you: but don't--though the public
    will--grieve.
As it's sometimes my whim to be vulgar, it's sometimes my whim to be brief;
As when once I observed, after Heine, that "she was a harlot, and I" (which
    is true) "was a thief."
(Though you hardly should cite this particular line, by the way, as an
    instance of absolute brevity:
I'm aware, man, of that; so you needn't disgrace yourself, sir, by such
    grossly mistimed and impertinent levity.)
I don't like to break off, any more than you wish me to stop: but my
    fate is
Not to vent half a million such rhymes without blockheads exclaiming--

                    JAM SATIS.


_Specimen from the speaker's original poems._

Come into the orchard, Anne,
  For the dark owl, Night, has fled,
And Phosphor slumbers, as well as he can
  With a daffodil sky for a bed:
And the musk of the roses perplexes a man,
  And the pimpernel muddles his head.

       *       *       *       *       *




SONNET FOR A PICTURE


That nose is out of drawing. With a gasp,
  She pants upon the passionate lips that ache
  With the red drain of her own mouth, and make
A monochord of colour. Like an asp,
One lithe lock wriggles in his rutilant grasp.
  Her bosom is an oven of myrrh, to bake
  Love's white warm shewbread to a browner cake.
The lock his fingers clench has burst its hasp.
The legs are absolutely abominable.
  Ah! what keen overgust of wild-eyed woes
  Flags in that bosom, flushes in that nose?
Nay! Death sets riddles for desire to spell,
  Responsive. What red hem earth's passion sews,
But may be ravenously unripped in hell?

       *       *       *       *       *




NEPHELIDIA


From the depth of the dreamy decline of the dawn through a notable nimbus
    of nebulous noonshine,
  Pallid and pink as the palm of the flag-flower that flickers with fear
    of the flies as they float,
Are they looks of our lovers that lustrously lean from a marvel of mystic
    miraculous moonshine,
  These that we feel in the blood of our blushes that thicken and threaten
    with throbs through the throat?
Thicken and thrill as a theatre thronged at appeal of an actor's appalled
    agitation,
  Fainter with fear of the fires of the future than pale with the promise
    of pride in the past;
Flushed with the famishing fullness of fever that reddens with radiance
    of rathe recreation,
  Gaunt as the ghastliest of glimpses that gleam through the gloom of
    the gloaming when ghosts go aghast?
Nay, for the nick of the tick of the time is a tremulous touch on the
    temples of terror,
  Strained as the sinews yet strenuous with strife of the dead who is
    dumb as the dust-heaps of death:
Surely no soul is it, sweet as the spasm of erotic emotional exquisite
    error,
  Bathed in the balms of beatified bliss, beatific itself by beatitude's
    breath.
Surely no spirit or sense of a soul that was soft to the spirit and soul
    of our senses
  Sweetens the stress of suspiring suspicion that sobs in the semblance
    and sound of a sigh;
Only this oracle opens Olympian, in mystical moods and triangular tenses--
  "Life is the lust of a lamp for the light that is dark till the dawn
    of the day when we die."
Mild is the mirk and monotonous music of memory, melodiously mute as
    it may be,
  While the hope in the heart of a hero is bruised by the breach of
    men's rapiers, resigned to the rod;
Made meek as a mother whose bosom-beats bound with the bliss-bringing
    bulk of a balm-breathing baby,
  As they grope through the grave-yard of creeds, under skies growing
    green at a groan for the grimness of God.
Blank is the book of his bounty beholden of old, and its binding is
    blacker than bluer:
  Out of blue into black is the scheme of the skies, and their dews
    are the wine of the bloodshed of things;
Till the darkling desire of delight shall be free as a fawn that is
    freed from the fangs that pursue her,
  Till the heart-beats of hell shall be hushed by a hymn from the hunt
    that has harried the kennel of kings.








End of Project Gutenberg's The Heptalogia, by Algernon Charles Swinburne

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE HEPTALOGIA ***

***** This file should be named 18210-8.txt or 18210-8.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/1/8/2/1/18210/

Produced by Paul Murray, Diane Monico, and the Project
Gutenberg Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

*** END: FULL LICENSE ***


﻿The Project Gutenberg EBook of A Midsummer Holiday and Other Poems, by 
Algernon Charles Swinburne

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: A Midsummer Holiday and Other Poems

Author: Algernon Charles Swinburne

Release Date: May 19, 2006 [EBook #18424]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK A MIDSUMMER HOLIDAY AND ***




Produced by Chuck Greif, Louise Hope, Thierry Alberto,
Henry Craig and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team
at http://www.pgdp.net





              A MIDSUMMER HOLIDAY

               _AND OTHER POEMS_

                       BY

          ALGERNON CHARLES SWINBURNE


                _THIRD EDITION_


                     London
          CHATTO & WINDUS, PICCADILLY
                      1889




CONTENTS.

A MIDSUMMER HOLIDAY:--

     I. THE SEABOARD                             3
    II. A HAVEN                                  6
   III. ON A COUNTRY ROAD                        9
    IV. THE MILL GARDEN                         12
     V. A SEA-MARK                              16
    VI. THE CLIFFSIDE PATH                      19
   VII. IN THE WATER                            22
  VIII. THE SUNBOWS                             27
    IX. ON THE VERGE                            31

A NEW-YEAR ODE                                  39

LINES ON THE MONUMENT OF GIUSEPPE MAZZINI       66

LES CASQUETS                                    70

A BALLAD OF SARK                                84

NINE YEARS OLD                                  87

AFTER A READING                                 94

MAYTIME IN MIDWINTER                           100

A DOUBLE BALLAD OF AUGUST                      105

HEARTSEASE COUNTRY                             109

A BALLAD OF APPEAL                             112

CRADLE SONGS                                   115

PELAGIUS                                       122

LOUIS BLANC                                    125

VOS DEOS LAUDAMUS                              128

ON THE BICENTENARY OF CORNEILLE                132

IN SEPULCRETIS                                 134

LOVE AND SCORN                                 139

ON THE DEATH OF RICHARD DOYLE                  142

IN MEMORY OF HENRY A. BRIGHT                   143

A SOLITUDE                                     144

VICTOR HUGO: L'ARCHIPEL DE LA MANCHE           145

THE TWILIGHT OF THE LORDS                      147

CLEAR THE WAY!                                 153

A WORD FOR THE COUNTRY                         156

A WORD FOR THE NATION                          167

A WORD FROM THE PSALMIST                       176

A BALLAD AT PARTING                            185




_A MIDSUMMER HOLIDAY_

TO THEODORE WATTS


THE SEABOARD.

The sea is at ebb, and the sound of her utmost word
Is soft as the least wave's lapse in a still small reach.
From bay into bay, on quest of a goal deferred,
From headland ever to headland and breach to breach
Where earth gives ear to the message that all days preach
With changes of gladness and sadness that cheer and chide,
The lone way lures me along by a chance untried
That haply, if hope dissolve not and faith be whole,
Not all for nought shall I seek, with a dream for guide.
The goal that is not, and ever again the goal.

The trackless ways are untravelled of sail or bird;
The hoar wave hardly recedes from the soundless beach.
The silence of instant noon goes nigh to be heard,
The viewless void to be visible: all and each,
A closure of calm no clamour of storm can breach
Concludes and confines and absorbs them on either side,
All forces of light and of life and the live world's pride.
Sands hardly ruffled of ripples that hardly roll
Seem ever to show as in reach of a swift brief stride
The goal that is not, and ever again the goal.

The waves are a joy to the seamew, the meads to the herd,
And a joy to the heart is a goal that it may not reach.
No sense that for ever the limits of sense engird,
No hearing or sight that is vassal to form or speech,
Learns ever the secret that shadow and silence teach,
Hears ever the notes that or ever they swell subside,
Sees ever the light that lights not the loud world's tide,
Clasps ever the cause of the lifelong scheme's control
Wherethrough we pursue, till the waters of life be dried,
The goal that is not, and ever again the goal.

Friend, what have we sought or seek we, whate'er betide,
Though the seaboard shift its mark from afar descried,
But aims whence ever anew shall arise the soul?
Love, thought, song, life, but show for a glimpse and hide
The goal that is not, and ever again the goal.


A HAVEN.

East and north a waste of waters, south and west
Lonelier lands than dreams in sleep would feign to be,
When the soul goes forth on travel, and is prest
Round and compassed in with clouds that flash and flee
Dells without a streamlet, downs without a tree,
Cirques of hollow cliff that crumble, give their guest
Little hope, till hard at hand he pause, to see
Where the small town smiles, a warm still sea-side nest.

Many a lone long mile, by many a headland's crest,
Down by many a garden dear to bird and bee,
Up by many a sea-down's bare and breezy breast,
Winds the sandy strait of road where flowers run free.
Here along the deep steep lanes by field and lea
Knights have carolled, pilgrims chanted, on their quest,
Haply, ere a roof rose toward the bleak strand's lee,
Where the small town smiles, a warm still sea-side nest.

Are the wild lands cursed perchance of time, or blest,
Sad with fear or glad with comfort of the sea?
Are the ruinous towers of churches fallen on rest
Watched of wanderers woful now, glad once as we,
When the night has all men's eyes and hearts in fee,
When the soul bows down dethroned and dispossest?
Yet must peace keep guard, by day's and night's decree,
Where the small town smiles, a warm still sea-side nest.

Friend, the lonely land is bright for you and me
All its wild ways through: but this methinks is best,
Here to watch how kindly time and change agree
Where the small town smiles, a warm still sea-side nest.


ON A COUNTRY ROAD.

Along these low pleached lanes, on such a day,
So soft a day as this, through shade and sun,
With glad grave eyes that scanned the glad wild way,
And heart still hovering o'er a song begun,
And smile that warmed the world with benison,
Our father, lord long since of lordly rhyme,
Long since hath haply ridden, when the lime
Bloomed broad above him, flowering where he came.
Because thy passage once made warm this clime,
Our father Chaucer, here we praise thy name.

Each year that England clothes herself with May,
She takes thy likeness on her. Time hath spun
Fresh raiment all in vain and strange array
For earth and man's new spirit, fain to shun
Things past for dreams of better to be won,
Through many a century since thy funeral chime
Rang, and men deemed it death's most direful crime
To have spared not thee for very love or shame;
And yet, while mists round last year's memories climb,
Our father Chaucer, here we praise thy name.

Each turn of the old wild road whereon we stray,
Meseems, might bring us face to face with one
Whom seeing we could not but give thanks, and pray
For England's love our father and her son
To speak with us as once in days long done
With all men, sage and churl and monk and mime,
Who knew not as we know the soul sublime
That sang for song's love more than lust of fame.
Yet, though this be not, yet, in happy time,
Our father Chaucer, here we praise thy name.

Friend, even as bees about the flowering thyme,
Years crowd on years, till hoar decay begrime
Names once beloved; but, seeing the sun the same,
As birds of autumn fain to praise the prime,
Our father Chaucer, here we praise thy name.


THE MILL GARDEN.

Stately stand the sunflowers, glowing down the garden-side,
Ranged in royal rank arow along the warm grey wall,
Whence their deep disks burn at rich midnoon afire with pride,
Even as though their beams indeed were sunbeams, and the tall
Sceptral stems bore stars whose reign endures, not flowers that fall.
Lowlier laughs and basks the kindlier flower of homelier fame,
Held by love the sweeter that it blooms in Shakespeare's name,
Fragrant yet as though his hand had touched and made it thrill,
Like the whole world's heart, with warm new life and gladdening flame.
Fair befall the fair green close that lies below the mill!

Softlier here the flower-soft feet of refluent seasons glide,
Lightlier breathes the long low note of change's gentler call.
Wind and storm and landslip feed the lone sea's gulf outside,
Half a seamew's first flight hence; but scarce may these appal
Peace, whose perfect seal is set for signet here on all.
Steep and deep and sterile, under fields no plough can tame,
Dip the cliffs full-fledged with poppies red as love or shame,
Wide wan daisies bleak and bold, or herbage harsh and chill;
Here the full clove pinks and wallflowers crown the love they claim.
Fair befall the fair green close that lies below the mill!

All the place breathes low, but not for fear lest ill betide,
Soft as roses answering roses, or a dove's recall.
Little heeds it how the seaward banks may stoop and slide,
How the winds and years may hold all outer things in thrall,
How their wrath may work on hoar church tower and boundary wall.
Far and wide the waste and ravin of their rule proclaim
Change alone the changeless lord of things, alone the same:
Here a flower is stronger than the winds that work their will,
Or the years that wing their way through darkness toward their aim.
Fair befall the fair green close that lies below the mill!

Friend, the home that smiled us welcome hither when we came,
When we pass again with summer, surely should reclaim
Somewhat given of heart's thanksgiving more than words fulfil--
More than song, were song more sweet than all but love, might frame.
Fair befall the fair green close that lies below the mill!


A SEA-MARK.

Rains have left the sea-banks ill to climb:
Waveward sinks the loosening seaboard's floor:
Half the sliding cliffs are mire and slime.
Earth, a fruit rain-rotted to the core,
Drops dissolving down in flakes, that pour
Dense as gouts from eaves grown foul with grime.
One sole rock which years that scathe not score
Stands a sea-mark in the tides of time.

Time were even as even the rainiest clime,
Life were even as even this lapsing shore,
Might not aught outlive their trustless prime:
Vainly fear would wail or hope implore,
Vainly grief revile or love adore
Seasons clothed in sunshine, rain, or rime
Now for me one comfort held in store
Stands a sea-mark in the tides of time.

Once, by fate's default or chance's crime,
Each apart, our burdens each we bore;
Heard, in monotones like bells that chime,
Chime the sounds of sorrows, float and soar
Joy's full carols, near or far before;
Heard not yet across the alternate rhyme
Time's tongue tell what sign set fast of yore
Stands a sea-mark in the tides of time.

Friend, the sign we knew not heretofore
Towers in sight here present and sublime.
Faith in faith established evermore
Stands a sea-mark in the tides of time.


THE CLIFFSIDE PATH.

Seaward goes the sun, and homeward by the down
We, before the night upon his grave be sealed.
Low behind us lies the bright steep murmuring town,
High before us heaves the steep rough silent field.
Breach by ghastlier breach, the cliffs collapsing yield:
Half the path is broken, half the banks divide;
Flawed and crumbled, riven and rent, they cleave and slide
Toward the ridged and wrinkled waste of girdling sand
Deep beneath, whose furrows tell how far and wide
Wind is lord and change is sovereign of the strand.

Star by star on the unsunned waters twiring down.
Golden spear-points glance against a silver shield.
Over banks and bents, across the headland's crown,
As by pulse of gradual plumes through twilight wheeled,
Soft as sleep, the waking wind awakes the weald.
Moor and copse and fallow, near or far descried.
Feel the mild wings move, and gladden where they glide:
Silence, uttering love that all things understand,
Bids the quiet fields forget that hard beside
Wind is lord and change is sovereign of the strand.

Yet may sight, ere all the hoar soft shade grow brown,
Hardly reckon half the lifts and rents unhealed
Where the scarred cliffs downward sundering drive and drown,
Hewn as if with stroke of swords in tempest steeled,
Wielded as the night's will and the wind's may wield.
Crowned and zoned in vain with flowers of autumn-tide,
Soon the blasts shall break them, soon the waters hide,
Soon, where late we stood, shall no man ever stand.
Life and love seek harbourage on the landward side:
Wind is lord and change is sovereign of the strand.

Friend, though man be less than these, for all his pride,
Yet, for all his weakness, shall not hope abide?
Wind and change can wreck but life and waste but land:
Truth and trust are sure, though here till all subside
Wind is lord and change is sovereign of the strand.


IN THE WATER.

The sea is awake, and the sound of the song
        of the joy of her waking is rolled
From afar to the star that recedes, from anear
        to the wastes of the wild wide shore.
Her call is a trumpet compelling us homeward:
        if dawn in her east be acold,
From the sea shall we crave not her grace to rekindle
        the life that it kindled before,
Her breath to requicken, her bosom to rock us,
        her kisses to bless as of yore?
For the wind, with his wings half open, at pause
        in the sky, neither fettered nor free,
Leans waveward and flutters the ripple to laughter
        and fain would the twain of us be
Where lightly the wave yearns forward from under
        the curve of the deep dawn's dome,
And, full of the morning and fired with the pride
        of the glory thereof and the glee,
Strike out from the shore as the heart in us bids
        and beseeches, athirst for the foam.

Life holds not an hour that is better to live in:
        the past is a tale that is told,
The future a sun-flecked shadow, alive and asleep,
        with a blessing in store.
As we give us again to the waters, the rapture
        of limbs that the waters enfold
Is less than the rapture of spirit whereby,
        though the burden it quits were sore,
Our souls and the bodies they wield at their will
        are absorbed in the life they adore--
In the life that endures no burden, and bows not
        the forehead, and bends not the knee--
In the life everlasting of earth and of heaven,
        in the laws that atone and agree,
In the measureless music of things, in the fervour
        of forces that rest or that roam,
That cross and return and reissue, as I
        after you and as you after me
Strike out from the shore as the heart in us bids
        and beseeches, athirst for the foam.

For, albeit he were less than the least of them, haply
        the heart of a man may be bold
To rejoice in the word of the sea as a mother's
        that saith to the son she bore,
Child, was not the life in thee mine, and my spirit
        the breath in thy lips from of old?
Have I let not thy weakness exult in my strength,
        and thy foolishness learn of my lore?
Have I helped not or healed not thine anguish, or made not
        the might of thy gladness more?
And surely his heart should answer, The light
        of the love of my life is in thee.
She is fairer than earth, and the sun is not fairer,
        the wind is not blither than she:
From my youth hath she shown me the joy of her bays
        that I crossed, of her cliffs that I clomb,
Till now that the twain of us here, in desire
        of the dawn and in trust of the sea,
Strike out from the shore as the heart in us bids
        and beseeches, athirst for the foam.

Friend, earth is a harbour of refuge for winter,
        a covert whereunder to flee
When day is the vassal of night, and the strength
        of the hosts of her mightier than he;
But here is the presence adored of me, here
        my desire is at rest and at home.
There are cliffs to be climbed upon land, there are ways
        to be trodden and ridden, but we
Strike out from the shore as the heart in us bids
        and beseeches, athirst for the foam.


THE SUNBOWS.

Spray of song that springs in April,
        light of love that laughs through May,
Live and die and live for ever:
        nought of all thing far less fair
Keeps a surer life than these
        that seem to pass like fire away.
In the souls they live which are
        but all the brighter that they were;
In the hearts that kindle, thinking
        what delight of old was there.
Wind that shapes and lifts and shifts them
        bids perpetual memory play
Over dreams and in and out
        of deeds and thoughts which seem to wear
Light that leaps and runs and revels
        through the springing flames of spray.

Dawn is wild upon the waters
        where we drink of dawn to-day:
Wide, from wave to wave rekindling
        in rebound through radiant air,
Flash the fires unwoven and woven
        again of wind that works in play,
Working wonders more than heart
        may note or sight may wellnigh dare,
Wefts of rarer light than colours
        rain from heaven, though this be rare.
Arch on arch unbuilt in building,
        reared and ruined ray by ray,
Breaks and brightens, laughs and lessens,
        even till eyes may hardly bear
Light that leaps and runs and revels
        through the springing flames of spray.

Year on year sheds light and music
        rolled and flashed from bay to bay
Round the summer capes of time
        and winter headlands keen and bare
Whence the soul keeps watch, and bids
        her vassal memory watch and pray,
If perchance the dawn may quicken,
        or perchance the midnight spare.
Silence quells not music, darkness
        takes not sunlight in her snare;
Shall not joys endure that perish?
        Yea, saith dawn, though night say nay:
Life on life goes out, but very
        life enkindles everywhere
Light that leaps and runs and revels
        through the springing flames of spray.

Friend, were life no more than this is,
        well would yet the living fare.
All aflower and all afire
        and all flung heavenward, who shall say
Such a flash of life were worthless?
        This is worth a world of care--
Light that leaps and runs and revels
        through the springing flames of spray.


ON THE VERGE.

Here begins the sea that ends not
        till the world's end. Where we stand,
Could we know the next high sea-mark
        set beyond these waves that gleam,
We should know what never man hath
        known, nor eye of man hath scanned.
Nought beyond these coiling clouds
        that melt like fume of shrines that steam
Breaks or stays the strength of waters
        till they pass our bounds of dream.
Where the waste Land's End leans westward,
        all the seas it watches roll
Find their border fixed beyond them,
        and a worldwide shore's control:
These whereby we stand no shore
        beyond us limits: these are free.
Gazing hence, we see the water
        that grows iron round the Pole,
From the shore that hath no shore
        beyond it set in all the sea.

Sail on sail along the sea-line
        fades and flashes; here on land
Flash and fade the wheeling wings
        on wings of mews that plunge and scream.
Hour on hour along the line
        of life and time's evasive strand
Shines and darkens, wanes and waxes,
        slays and dies: and scarce they seem
More than motes that thronged and trembled
        in the brief noon's breath and beam.
Some with crying and wailing, some
        with notes like sound of bells that toll,
Some with sighing and laughing, some
        with words that blessed and made us whole,
Passed, and left us, and we know not
        what they were, nor what were we.
Would we know, being mortal? Never
        breath of answering whisper stole
From the shore that hath no shore
        beyond it set in all the sea.

Shadows, would we question darkness?
        Ere our eyes and brows be fanned
Round with airs of twilight, washed
        with dews from sleep's eternal stream,
Would we know sleep's guarded secret?
        Ere the fire consume the brand,
Would it know if yet its ashes
        may requicken? yet we deem
Surely man may know, or ever
        night unyoke her starry team,
What the dawn shall be, or if
        the dawn shall be not, yea, the scroll
Would we read of sleep's dark scripture,
        pledge of peace or doom of dole.
Ah, but here man's heart leaps, yearning
        toward the gloom with venturous glee,
Though his pilot eye behold
        nor bay nor harbour, rock nor shoal,
From the shore that hath no shore
        beyond it set in all the sea.

Friend, who knows if death indeed
        have life or life have death for goal?
Day nor night can tell us, nor
        may seas declare nor skies unroll
What has been from everlasting,
        or if aught shall always be.
Silence answering only strikes
        response reverberate on the soul
From the shore that hath no shore
        beyond it set in all the sea.




_A NEW-YEAR ODE_

TO VICTOR HUGO


I.

Twice twelve times have the springs of years refilled
  Their fountains from the river-head of time
Since by the green sea's marge, ere autumn chilled
  Waters and woods with sense of changing clime,
A great light rose upon my soul, and thrilled
  My spirit of sense with sense of spheres in chime,
Sound as of song wherewith a God would build
  Towers that no force of conquering war might climb.
      Wind shook the glimmering sea
      Even as my soul in me
  Was stirred with breath of mastery more sublime,
      Uplift and borne along
      More thunderous tides of song,
  Where wave rang back to wave more rapturous rhyme
    And world on world flashed lordlier light
Than ever lit the wandering ways of ships by night.


II.

The spirit of God, whose breath of life is song,
  Moved, though his word was human, on the face
Of those deep waters of the soul, too long
  Dumb, dark, and cold, that waited for the grace
Wherewith day kindles heaven: and as some throng
  Of quiring wings fills full some lone chill place
With sudden rush of life and joy, more strong
  Than death or sorrow or all night's darkling race,
      So was my heart, that heard
      All heaven in each deep word,
  Filled full with light of thought, and waxed apace
      Itself more wide and deep,
      To take that gift and keep
  And cherish while my days fulfilled their space;
    A record wide as earth and sea,
The Legend writ of Ages past and yet to be.


III.

As high the chant of Paradise and Hell
  Rose, when the soul of Milton gave it wings;
As wide the sweep of Shakespeare's empire fell,
  When life had bared for him her secret springs;
But not his various soul might range and dwell
  Amid the mysteries of the founts of things;
Nor Milton's range of rule so far might swell
  Across the kingdoms of forgotten kings.
      Men, centuries, nations, time,
      Life, death, love, trust, and crime,
  Rang record through the change of smitten strings
      That felt an exile's hand
      Sound hope for every land
  More loud than storm's cloud-sundering trumpet rings,
    And bid strong death for judgment rise,
And life bow down for judgment of his awless eyes.


IV.

And death, soul-stricken in his strength, resigned
  The keeping of the sepulchres to song;
And life was humbled, and his height of mind
  Brought lower than lies a grave-stone fallen along;
And like a ghost and like a God mankind
  Rose clad with light and darkness; weak and strong,
Clean and unclean, with eyes afire and blind,
  Wounded and whole, fast bound with cord and thong,
      Free; fair and foul, sin-stained,
      And sinless; crowned and chained;
  Fleet-limbed, and halting all his lifetime long;
      Glad of deep shame, and sad
      For shame's sake; wise, and mad;
  Girt round with love and hate of right and wrong;
    Armed and disarmed for sleep and strife;
Proud, and sore fear made havoc of his pride of life.


V.

Shadows and shapes of fable and storied sooth
  Rose glorious as with gleam of gold unpriced;
Eve, clothed with heavenly nakedness and youth
  That matched the morning's; Cain, self-sacrificed
On crime's first altar: legends wise as truth,
  And truth in legends deep embalmed and spiced;
The stars that saw the starlike eyes of Ruth,
  The grave that heard the clarion call of Christ.
      And higher than sorrow and mirth
      The heavenly song of earth
  Sprang, in such notes as might have well sufficed
      To still the storms of time
      And sin's contentious clime
  With peace renewed of life reparadised:
    Earth, scarred not yet with temporal scars;
Goddess of gods, our mother, chosen among the stars.


VI.

Earth fair as heaven, ere change and time set odds
  Between them, light and darkness know not when,
And fear, grown strong through panic periods,
  Crouched, a crowned worm, in faith's Lernean fen,
And love lay bound, and hope was scourged with rods,
  And death cried out from desert and from den,
Seeing all the heaven above him dark with gods
  And all the world about him marred of men.
      Cities that nought might purge
      Save the sea's whelming surge
  From all the pent pollutions in their pen
      Deep death drank down, and wrought,
      With wreck of all things, nought,
  That none might live of all their names again,
    Nor aught of all whose life is breath
Serve any God whose likeness was not like to death.


VII.

Till by the lips and eyes of one live nation
  The blind mute world found grace to see and speak,
And light watched rise a more divine creation
  At that more godlike utterance of the Greek,
Let there be freedom. Kings whose orient station
  Made pale the morn, and all her presage bleak,
Girt each with strengths of all his generation,
  Dim tribes of shamefaced soul and sun-swart cheek,
      Twice, urged with one desire,
      Son following hard on sire,
  With all the wrath of all a world to wreak,
      And all the rage of night
      Afire against the light
  Whose weakness makes her strong-winged empire weak,
    Stood up to unsay that saying, and fell
Too far for song, though song were thousand-tongued, to tell.


VIII.

From those deep echoes of the loud Ægean
  That rolled response whereat false fear was chid
By songs of joy sublime and Sophoclean,
  Fresh notes reverberate westward rose to bid
All wearier times take comfort from the pæan
  That tells the night what deeds the sunrise did,
Even till the lawns and torrents Pyrenean
  Ring answer from the records of the Cid.
      But never force of fountains
      From sunniest hearts of mountains
  Wherein the soul of hidden June was hid
      Poured forth so pure and strong
      Springs of reiterate song,
  Loud as the streams his fame was reared amid,
    More sweet than flowers they feed, and fair
With grace of lordlier sunshine and more lambent air.


IX.

A star more prosperous than the storm-clothed east's
  Clothed all the warm south-west with light like spring's,
When hands of strong men spread the wolves their feasts
  And from snake-spirited princes plucked the stings;
Ere earth, grown all one den of hurtling beasts,
  Had for her sunshine and her watersprings
The fire of hell that warmed the hearts of priests,
  The wells of blood that slaked the lips of kings.
      The shadow of night made stone
      Stood populous and alone,
  Dense with its dead and loathed of living things
      That draw not life from death,
      And as with hell's own breath
  And clangour of immitigable wings
    Vexed the fair face of Paris, made
Foul in its murderous imminence of sound and shade.


X.

And all these things were parcels of the vision
  That moved a cloud before his eyes, or stood
A tower half shattered by the strong collision
  Of spirit and spirit, of evil gods with good;
A ruinous wall rent through with grim division,
  Where time had marked his every monstrous mood
Of scorn and strength and pride and self-derision:
  The Tower of Things, that felt upon it brood
      Night, and about it cast
      The storm of all the past
  Now mute and forceless as a fire subdued:
      Yet through the rifted years
      And centuries veiled with tears
  And ages as with very death imbrued
    Freedom, whence hope and faith grow strong,
Smiles, and firm love sustains the indissoluble song.


XI.

Above the cloudy coil of days deceased,
  Its might of flight, with mists and storms beset,
Burns heavenward, as with heart and hope increased,
  For all the change of tempests, all the fret
Of frost or fire, keen fraud or force released,
  Wherewith the world once wasted knows not yet
If evil or good lit all the darkling east
  From the ardent moon of sovereign Mahomet.
      Sublime in work and will
      The song sublimer still
  Salutes him, ere the splendour shrink and set;
      Then with imperious eye
      And wing that sounds the sky
  Soars and sees risen as ghosts in concourse met
    The old world's seven elder wonders, firm
As dust and fixed as shadows, weaker than the worm.


XII.

High witness borne of knights high-souled and hoary
  Before death's face and empire's rings and glows
Even from the dust their life poured forth left gory,
  As the eagle's cry rings after from the snows
Supreme rebuke of shame clothed round with glory
  And hosts whose track the false crowned eagle shows;
More loud than sounds through stormiest song and story
  The laugh of slayers whose names the sea-wind knows;
      More loud than peals on land
      In many a red wet hand
  The clash of gold and cymbals as they close;
      Loud as the blast that meets
      The might of marshalled fleets
  And sheds it into shipwreck, like a rose
    Blown from a child's light grasp in sign
That earth's high lords are lords not over breeze and brine.


XIII.

Above the dust and mire of man's dejection
  The wide-winged spirit of song resurgent sees
His wingless and long-labouring resurrection
  Up the arduous heaven, by sore and strange degrees
Mount, and with splendour of the soul's reflection
  Strike heaven's dark sovereign down upon his knees,
Pale in the light of orient insurrection,
  And dumb before the almightier lord's decrees
      Who bade him be of yore,
      Who bids him be no more:
  And all earth's heart is quickened as the sea's,
      Even as when sunrise burns
      The very sea's heart yearns
  That heard not on the midnight-walking breeze
    The wail that woke with evensong
From hearts of poor folk watching all the darkness long.


XIV.

Dawn and the beams of sunbright song illume
  Love, with strange children at her piteous breast,
By grace of weakness from the grave-mouthed gloom
  Plucked, and by mercy lulled to living rest,
Soft as the nursling's nigh the grandsire's tomb
  That fell on sleep, a bird of rifled nest;
Soft as the lips whose smile unsaid the doom
  That gave their sire to violent death's arrest.
      Even for such love's sake strong,
      Wrath fires the inveterate song
  That bids hell gape for one whose bland mouth blest
      All slayers and liars that sighed
      Prayer as they slew and lied
  Till blood had clothed his priesthood as a vest,
    And hears, though darkness yet be dumb,
The silence of the trumpet of the wrath to come.


XV.

Nor lacked these lights of constellated age
  A star among them fed with life more dire,
Lit with his bloodied fame, whose withering rage
  Made earth for heaven's sake one funereal pyre
And life in faith's name one appointed stage
  For death to purge the souls of men with fire.
Heaven, earth, and hell on one thrice tragic page
  Mixed all their light and darkness: one man's lyre
      Gave all their echoes voice;
      Bade rose-cheeked love rejoice,
  And cold-lipped craft with ravenous fear conspire,
      And fire-eyed faith smite hope
      Dead, seeing enthroned as Pope
  And crowned of heaven on earth at hell's desire
    Sin, called by death's incestuous name
Borgia: the world that heard it flushed and quailed with shame.


XVI.

Another year, and hope triumphant heard
  The consummating sound of song that spake
Conclusion to the multitudinous word
  Whose expectation held her spirit awake
Till full delight for twice twelve years deferred
  Bade all souls entering eat and drink, and take
A third time comfort given them, that the third
  Might heap the measure up of twain, and make
      The sinking year sublime
      Among all sons of time
  And fan in all men's memories for his sake.
      Each thought of ours became
      Fire, kindling from his flame,
  And music widening in his wide song's wake.
    Yea, and the world bore witness here
How great a light was risen upon this darkening year.


XVII.

It was the dawn of winter: sword in sheath,
  Change, veiled and mild, came down the gradual air
With cold slow smiles that hid the doom beneath.
  Five days to die in yet were autumn's, ere
The last leaf withered from his flowerless wreath.
  South, east, and north, our skies were all blown bare,
But westward over glimmering holt and heath
  Cloud, wind, and light had made a heaven more fair
      Than ever dream or truth
      Showed earth in time's keen youth
  When men with angels communed unaware.
      Above the sun's head, now
      Veiled even to the ardent brow,
  Rose two sheer wings of sundering cloud, that were
    As a bird's poised for vehement flight,
Full-fledged with plumes of tawny fire and hoar grey light.


XVIII.

As midnight black, as twilight brown, they spread,
  But feathered thick with flame that streaked and lined
Their living darkness, ominous else of dread,
  From south to northmost verge of heaven inclined
Most like some giant angel's, whose bent head
  Bowed earthward, as with message for mankind
Of doom or benediction to be shed
  From passage of his presence. Far behind,
      Even while they seemed to close,
      Stoop, and take flight, arose
  Above them, higher than heavenliest thought may find
      In light or night supreme
      Of vision or of dream,
  Immeasurable of men's eyes or mounting mind,
    Heaven, manifest in manifold
Light of pure pallid amber, cheered with fire of gold.


XIX.

And where the fine gold faded all the sky
  Shone green as the outer sea when April glows,
Inlaid with flakes and feathers fledged to fly
  Of cloud suspense in rapture and repose,
With large live petals, broad as love bids lie
  Full open when the sun salutes the rose,
And small rent sprays wherewith the heavens most high
  Were strewn as autumn strews the garden-close
      With ruinous roseleaves whirled
      About their wan chill world,
  Through wind-worn bowers that now no music knows,
      Spoil of the dim dusk year
      Whose utter night is near,
  And near the flower of dawn beyond it blows;
    Till east and west were fire and light,
As though the dawn to come had flushed the coming night.


XX.

The highways paced of men that toil or play,
  The byways known of none but lonely feet,
Were paven of purple woven of night and day
  With hands that met as hands of friends might meet--
As though night's were not lifted up to slay
  And day's had waxed not weaker. Peace more sweet
Than music, light more soft than shadow, lay
  On downs and moorlands wan with day's defeat,
      That watched afar above
      Life's very rose of love
  Let all its lustrous leaves fall, fade, and fleet,
      And fill all heaven and earth
      Full as with fires of birth
  Whence time should feed his years with light and heat:
    Nay, not life's, but a flower more strong
Than life or time or death, love's very rose of song.


XXI.

Song visible, whence all men's eyes were lit
  With love and loving wonder: song that glowed
Through cloud and change on souls that knew not it
  And hearts that wist not whence their comfort flowed,
Whence fear was lightened of her fever-fit,
  Whence anguish of her life-compelling load.
Yea, no man's head whereon the fire alit,
  Of all that passed along that sunset road
      Westward, no brow so drear,
      No eye so dull of cheer,
  No face so mean whereon that light abode,
      But as with alien pride
      Strange godhead glorified
  Each feature flushed from heaven with fire that showed
    The likeness of its own life wrought
By strong transfiguration as of living thought.


XXII.

Nor only clouds of the everlasting sky,
  Nor only men that paced that sunward way
To the utter bourne of evening, passed not by
  Unblest or unillumined: none might say,
Of all things visible in the wide world's eye,
  That all too low for all that grace it lay:
The lowliest lakelets of the moorland nigh,
  The narrowest pools where shallowest wavelets play,
      Were filled from heaven above
      With light like fire of love,
  With flames and colours like a dawn in May,
      As hearts that lowlier live
      With light of thoughts that give
  Light from the depth of souls more deep than they
      Through song's or story's kindling scroll,
The splendour of the shadow that reveals the soul.


XXIII.

For, when such light is in the world, we share,
  All of us, all the rays thereof that shine:
Its presence is alive in the unseen air,
  Its fire within our veins as quickening wine;
A spirit is shed on all men everywhere,
  Known or not known of all men for divine.
Yea, as the sun makes heaven, that light makes fair
  All souls of ours, all lesser souls than thine,
      Priest, prophet, seer and sage,
      Lord of a subject age
  That bears thy seal upon it for a sign;
      Whose name shall be thy name,
      Whose light thy light of fame,
  The light of love that makes thy soul a shrine;
    Whose record through all years to be
Shall bear this witness written--that its womb bare thee.


XXIV.

O mystery, whence to one man's hand was given
  Power upon all things of the spirit, and might
Whereby the veil of all the years was riven
  And naked stood the secret soul of night!
O marvel, hailed of eyes whence cloud is driven,
  That shows at last wrong reconciled with right
By death divine of evil and sin forgiven!
  O light of song, whose fire is perfect light!
      No speech, no voice, no thought,
      No love, avails us aught
  For service of thanksgiving in his sight
      Who hath given us all for ever
      Such gifts that man gave never
  So many and great since first Time's wings took flight.
    Man may not praise a spirit above
Man's: life and death shall praise him: we can only love.


XXV.

Life, everlasting while the worlds endure,
  Death, self-abased before a power more high,
Shall bear one witness, and their word stand sure,
  That not till time be dead shall this man die
Love, like a bird, comes loyal to his lure;
  Fame flies before him, wingless else to fly.
A child's heart toward his kind is not more pure,
  An eagle's toward the sun no lordlier eye.
      Awe sweet as love and proud
      As fame, though hushed and bowed,
  Yearns toward him silent as his face goes by:
      All crowns before his crown
      Triumphantly bow down,
  For pride that one more great than all draws nigh:
    All souls applaud, all hearts acclaim,
One heart benign, one soul supreme, one conquering name.




NOTES


  ST.  V.
   V.  3. La Légende des Siècles: Le Sacre de la Femme.
       4. La Conscience.
       7. Booz endormi.
       8. Première rencontre du Christ avec le tombeau.
       9. La Terre: Hymne.
  VI.  3. Les Temps Paniques.
       9. La Ville Disparue.
 VII.     Les Trois Cents.
VIII.  1. Le Détroit de l'Euripe: La Chanson de Sophocle à Salamine.
       7. Le Romancero du Cid.
  IX.  3. Le Petit Roi de Galice.
       5. Le Jour des Rois.
       9. Montfaucon.
   X.     La vision d'où est sorti ce livre.
  XI.  9. L'an neuf de l'Hégire.
      12. Les sept merveilles du monde.
 XII.  1. Les quatre jours d'Elciis.
       4. Le Régiment du baron Madruce.
       7. La Chanson des Aventuriers de la Mer.
       9. Les Reîtres.
      12. La Rose de l'Infante.
XIII.  1. Le Satyre.
      12. Les paysans au bord de la mer.
 XIV.  1. Les pauvres gens.
       5. Petit Paul.
       7. Guerre Civile.
       9. La Vision de Dante.
      15. La Trompette du Jugement.
  XV.     Torquemada (1882).
 XVI.     La Légende des Siècles: tome cinquième et dernier (1883).
XVII.     November 25, 1883.




_LINES ON THE MONUMENT OF GIUSEPPE MAZZINI._


Italia, mother of the souls of men,
      Mother divine,
Of all that served thee best with sword or pen,
      All sons of thine,

Thou knowest that here the likeness of the best
      Before thee stands,
The head most high, the heart found faithfullest,
      The purest hands.

Above the fume and foam of time that flits,
      The soul, we know,
Now sits on high where Alighieri sits
      With Angelo.

Not his own heavenly tongue hath heavenly speech
      Enough to say
What this man was, whose praise no thought may reach,
      No words can weigh.

Since man's first mother brought to mortal birth
      Her first-born son,
Such grace befell not ever man on earth
      As crowns this one.

Of God nor man was ever this thing said,
      That he could give
Life back to her who gave him, whence his dead
      Mother might live.

But this man found his mother dead and slain,
      With fast sealed eyes,
And bade the dead rise up and live again,
      And she did rise.

And all the world was bright with her through him:
      But dark with strife,
Like heaven's own sun that storming clouds bedim,
      Was all his life.

Life and the clouds are vanished: hate and fear
      Have had their span
Of time to hunt, and are not: he is here,
      The sunlike man.

City superb that hadst Columbus first
      For sovereign son,
Be prouder that thy breast hath later nurst
      This mightier one.

Glory be his for ever, while his land
      Lives and is free,
As with controlling breath and sovereign hand
      He bade her be.

Earth shows to heaven the names by thousands told
      That crown her fame,
But highest of all that heaven and earth behold
      Mazzini's name.




_LES CASQUETS._


From the depths of the waters that lighten and darken
  With change everlasting of life and of death,
Where hardly by noon if the lulled ear hearken
  It hears the sea's as a tired child's breath,
Where hardly by night if an eye dare scan it
  The storm lets shipwreck be seen or heard,
As the reefs to the waves and the foam to the granite
      Respond one merciless word,

Sheer seen and far, in the sea's live heaven,
  A seamew's flight from the wild sweet land,
White-plumed with foam if the wind wake, seven
  Black helms as of warriors that stir not stand.
From the depths that abide and the waves that environ
  Seven rocks rear heads that the midnight masks,
And the strokes of the swords of the storm are as iron
      On the steel of the wave-worn casques.

Be night's dark word as the word of a wizard,
  Be the word of dawn as a god's glad word,
Like heads of the spirits of darkness visored
  That see not for ever, nor ever have heard,
These basnets, plumed as for fight or plumeless,
  Crowned of the storm and by storm discrowned,
Keep ward of the lists where the dead lie tombless
      And the tale of them is not found.

Nor eye may number nor hand may reckon
  The tithes that are taken of life by the dark,
Or the ways of the path, if doom's hand beckon,
  For the soul to fare as a helmless bark--
Fare forth on a way that no sign showeth,
  Nor aught of its goal or of aught between,
A path for her flight which no fowl knoweth,
      Which the vulture's eye hath not seen.

Here still, though the wave and the wind seem lovers
  Lulled half asleep by their own soft words,
A dream as of death in the sun's light hovers,
  And a sign in the motions and cries of the birds.
Dark auguries and keen from the sweet sea-swallows
  Strike noon with a sense as of midnight's breath,
And the wing that flees and the wing that follows
      Are as types of the wings of death.

For here, when the night roars round, and under
  The white sea lightens and leaps like fire,
Acclaimed of storm and applauded in thunder,
  Sits death on the throne of his crowned desire.
Yea, hardly the hand of the god might fashion
  A seat more strong for his strength to take,
For the might of his heart and the pride of his passion
      To rejoice in the wars they make.

When the heart in him brightens with blitheness of battle
  And the depth of its thirst is fulfilled with strife,
And his ear with the ravage of bolts that rattle,
  And the soul of death with the pride of life,
Till the darkness is loud with his dark thanksgiving
  And wind and cloud are as chords of his hymn,
There is nought save death in the deep night living
      And the whole night worships him.

Heaven's height bows down to him, signed with his token,
  And the sea's depth, moved as a heart that yearns,
Heaves up to him, strong as a heart half broken,
  A heart that breaks in a prayer that burns
Of cloud is the shrine of his worship moulded,
  But the altar therein is of sea-shaped stone,
Whereon, with the strength of his wide wings folded,
      Sits death in the dark, alone.

He hears the word of his servant spoken,
  The word that the wind his servant saith,
Storm writes on the front of the night his token,
  That the skies may seem to bow down to death
But the clouds that stoop and the storms that minister
  Serve but as thralls that fulfil their tasks;
And his seal is not set save here on the sinister
      Crests reared of the crownless casques.

Nor flame nor plume of the storm that crowned them
  Gilds or quickens their stark black strength.
Life lightens and murmurs and laughs right round them,
  At peace with the noon's whole breadth and length,
At one with the heart of the soft-souled heaven,
  At one with the life of the kind wild land:
But its touch may unbrace not the strengths of the seven
      Casques hewn of the storm-wind's hand.

No touch may loosen the black braced helmlets
  For the wild elves' heads of the wild waves wrought.
As flowers on the sea are her small green realmlets,
  Like heavens made out of a child's heart's thought;
But these as thorns of her desolate places,
  Strong fangs that fasten and hold lives fast:
And the vizors are framed as for formless faces
      That a dark dream sees go past.

Of fear and of fate are the frontlets fashioned,
  And the heads behind them are dire and dumb.
When the heart of the darkness is scarce impassioned,
  Thrilled scarce with sense of the wrath to come,
They bear the sign from of old engraven,
  Though peace be round them and strife seem far,
That here is none but the night-wind's haven,
      With death for the harbour bar.

Of the iron of doom are the casquets carven,
  That never the rivets thereof should burst.
When the heart of the darkness is hunger-starven,
  And the throats of the gulfs are agape for thirst,
And stars are as flowers that the wind bids wither,
  And dawn is as hope struck dead by fear,
The rage of the ravenous night sets hither,
      And the crown of her work is here.

All shores about and afar lie lonely,
  But lonelier are these than the heart of grief,
These loose-linked rivets of rock, whence only
  Strange life scarce gleams from the sheer main reef,
With a blind wan face in the wild wan morning,
  With a live lit flame on its brows by night,
That the lost may lose not its word's mute warning
      And the blind by its grace have sight.

Here, walled in with the wide waste water,
  Grew the grace of a girl's lone life,
The sea's and the sea-wind's foster-daughter,
  And peace was hers in the main mid strife.
For her were the rocks clothed round with thunder,
  And the crests of them carved by the storm-smith's craft:
For her was the mid storm rent in sunder
      As with passion that wailed and laughed.

For her the sunrise kindled and scattered
  The red rose-leaflets of countless cloud:
For her the blasts of the springtide shattered
  The strengths reluctant of waves back-bowed.
For her would winds in the mid sky levy
  Bright wars that hardly the night bade cease
At noon, when sleep on the sea lies heavy,
      For her would the sun make peace.

Peace rose crowned with the dawn on golden
  Lit leagues of triumph that flamed and smiled:
Peace lay lulled in the moon-beholden
  Warm darkness making the world's heart mild
For all the wide waves' troubles and treasons,
  One word only her soul's ear heard
Speak from stormless and storm-rent seasons,
      And nought save peace was the word.

All her life waxed large with the light of it,
  All her heart fed full on the sound:
Spirit and sense were exalted in sight of it,
  Compassed and girdled and clothed with it round.
Sense was none but a strong still rapture,
  Spirit was none but a joy sublime,
Of strength to curb and of craft to capture
      The craft and the strength of Time.

Time lay bound as in painless prison
  There, closed in with a strait small space.
Never thereon as a strange light risen
  Change had unveiled for her grief's far face
Three white walls flung out from the basement
  Girt the width of the world whereon
Gazing at night from her flame-lit casement
      She saw where the dark sea shone.

Hardly the breadth of a few brief paces,
  Hardly the length of a strong man's stride,
The small court flower lit with children's faces
  Scarce held scope for a bud to hide.
Yet here was a man's brood reared and hidden
  Between the rocks and the towers and the foam,
Where peril and pity and peace were bidden
      As guests to the same sure home.

Here would pity keep watch for peril,
  And surety comfort his heart with peace.
No flower save one, where the reefs lie sterile,
  Gave of the seed of its heart's increase.
Pity and surety and peace most lowly
  Were the root and the stem and the bloom of the flower:
And the light and the breath of the buds kept holy
      That maid's else blossomless bower.

With never a leaf but the seaweed's tangle,
  Never a bird's but the seamew's note,
It heard all round it the strong storms wrangle,
  Watched far past it the waste wrecks float.
But her soul was stilled by the sky's endurance,
  And her heart made glad with the sea's content;
And her faith waxed more in the sun's assurance
      For the winds that came and went.

Sweetness was brought for her forth of the bitter
  Sea's strength, and light of the deep sea's dark,
From where green lawns on Alderney glitter
  To the bastioned crags of the steeps of Sark.
These she knew from afar beholden,
  And marvelled haply what life would be
On moors that sunset and dawn leave golden,
      In dells that smile on the sea.

And forth she fared as a stout-souled rover,
  For a brief blithe raid on the bounding brine:
And light winds ferried her light bark over
  To the lone soft island of fair-limbed kine.
But the league-long length of its wild green border,
  And the small bright streets of serene St. Anne,
Perplexed her sense with a strange disorder
      At sight of the works of man.

The world was here, and the world's confusion,
  And the dust of the wheels of revolving life,
Pain, labour, change, and the fierce illusion
  Of strife more vain than the sea's old strife.
And her heart within her was vexed, and dizzy
  The sense of her soul as a wheel that whirled:
She might not endure for a space that busy
      Loud coil of the troublous world.

Too full, she said, was the world of trouble,
  Too dense with noise of contentious things,
And shews less bright than the blithe foam's bubble
  As home she fared on the smooth wind's wings.
For joy grows loftier in air more lonely,
  Where only the sea's brood fain would be;
Where only the heart may receive in it only
      The love of the heart of the sea.




_A BALLAD OF SARK._


High beyond the granite portal arched across
  Like the gateway of some godlike giant's hold
Sweep and swell the billowy breasts of moor and moss
  East and westward, and the dell their slopes enfold
  Basks in purple, glows in green, exults in gold
Glens that know the dove and fells that hear the lark
Fill with joy the rapturous island, as an ark
  Full of spicery wrought from herb and flower and tree.
None would dream that grief even here may disembark
  On the wrathful woful marge of earth and sea.

Rocks emblazoned like the mid shield's royal boss
  Take the sun with all their blossom broad and bold.
None would dream that all this moorland's glow and gloss
  Could be dark as tombs that strike the spirit acold
  Even in eyes that opened here, and here behold
Now no sun relume from hope's belated spark
Any comfort, nor may ears of mourners hark
  Though the ripe woods ring with golden-throated glee,
While the soul lies shattered, like a stranded bark
  On the wrathful woful marge of earth and sea.

Death and doom are they whose crested triumphs toss
  On the proud plumed waves whence mourning notes are tolled.
Wail of perfect woe and moan for utter loss
  Raise the bride-song through the graveyard on the wold
  Where the bride-bed keeps the bridegroom fast in mould,
Where the bride, with death for priest and doom for clerk,
Hears for choir the throats of waves like wolves that bark,
  Sore anhungered, off the drear Eperquerie,
Fain to spoil the strongholds of the strength of Sark
  On the wrathful woful marge of earth and sea.

Prince of storm and tempest, lord whose ways are dark,
Wind whose wings are spread for flight that none may mark,
  Lightly dies the joy that lives by grace of thee.
Love through thee lies bleeding, hope lies cold and stark,
  On the wrathful woful marge of earth and sea.




_NINE YEARS OLD._

FEBRUARY 4, 1883.


I.

Lord of light, whose shine no hands destroy,
  God of song, whose hymn no tongue refuses,
Now, though spring far hence be cold and coy,
  Bid the golden mouths of all the Muses
Ring forth gold of strains without alloy,
  Till the ninefold rapture that suffuses
Heaven with song bid earth exult for joy,
  Since the child whose head this dawn bedews is
Sweet as once thy violet-cradled boy.


II.

Even as he lay lapped about with flowers,
  Lies the life now nine years old before us
Lapped about with love in all its hours;
  Hailed of many loves that chant in chorus
Loud or low from lush or leafless bowers,
  Some from hearts exultant born sonorous,
Some scarce louder-voiced than soft-tongued showers
  Two months hence, when spring's light wings poised o'er us
High shall hover, and her heart be ours.


III.

Even as he, though man-forsaken, smiled
  On the soft kind snakes divinely bidden
There to feed him in the green mid wild
  Full with hurtless honey, till the hidden
Birth should prosper, finding fate more mild,
  So full-fed with pleasures unforbidden,
So by love's lines blamelessly beguiled,
  Laughs the nursling of our hearts unchidden
Yet by change that mars not yet the child.


IV.

Ah, not yet! Thou, lord of night and day,
  Time, sweet father of such blameless pleasure,
Time, false friend who tak'st thy gifts away,
  Spare us yet some scantlings of the treasure,
Leave us yet some rapture of delay,
  Yet some bliss of blind and fearless leisure
Unprophetic of delight's decay,
  Yet some nights and days wherein to measure
All the joys that bless us while they may.


V.

Not the waste Arcadian woodland, wet
  Still with dawn and vocal with Alpheus,
Reared a nursling worthier love's regret,
  Lord, than this, whose eyes beholden free us
Straight from bonds the soul would fain forget,
  Fain cast off, that night and day might see us
Clear once more of life's vain fume and fret:
  Leave us, then, whate'er thy doom decree us,
Yet some days wherein to love him yet.


VI.

Yet some days wherein the child is ours,
  Ours, not thine, O lord whose hand is o'er us
Always, as the sky with suns and showers
  Dense and radiant, soundless or sonorous;
Yet some days for love's sake, ere the bowers
  Fade wherein his fair first years kept chorus
Night and day with Graces robed like hours,
  Ere this worshipped childhood wane before us,
Change, and bring forth fruit--but no more flowers.


VII.

Love we may the thing that is to be,
  Love we must; but how forego this olden
Joy, this flower of childish love, that we
  Held more dear than aught of Time is holden--
Time, whose laugh is like as Death's to see--
  Time, who heeds not aught of all beholden,
Heard, or touched in passing--flower or tree,
  Tares or grain of leaden days or golden--
More than wind has heed of ships at sea?


VIII.

First the babe, a very rose of joy,
  Sweet as hope's first note of jubilation,
Passes: then must growth and change destroy
  Next the child, and mar the consecration
Hallowing yet, ere thought or sense annoy,
  Childhood's yet half heavenlike habitation,
Bright as truth and frailer than a toy;
  Whence its guest with eager gratulation
Springs, and life grows larger round the boy.


IX.

Yet, ere sunrise wholly cease to shine,
  Ere change come to chide our hearts, and scatter
Memories marked for love's sake with a sign,
  Let the light of dawn beholden flatter
Yet some while our eyes that feed on thine,
  Child, with love that change nor time can shatter,
Love, whose silent song says more than mine
  Now, though charged with elder loves and latter
Here it hails a lord whose years are nine.




_AFTER A READING._


For the seven times seventh time love would renew
        the delight without end or alloy
That it takes in the praise as it takes in the presence
        of eyes that fulfil it with joy;
But how shall it praise them and rest unrebuked
        by the presence and pride of the boy?

Praise meet for a child is unmeet for an elder
        whose winters and springs are nine
What song may have strength in its wings to expand them,
        or light in its eyes to shine,
That shall seem not as weakness and darkness if matched
        with the theme I would fain make mine?

The round little flower of a face that exults
        in the sunshine of shadowless days
Defies the delight it enkindles to sing of it
        aught not unfit for the praise
Of the sweetest of all things that eyes may rejoice in
        and tremble with love as they gaze.

Such tricks and such meanings abound on the lips
        and the brows that are brighter than light,
The demure little chin, the sedate little nose,
        and the forehead of sun-stained white,
That love overflows into laughter and laughter
        subsides into love at the sight.

Each limb and each feature has action in tune
        with the meaning that smiles as it speaks
From the fervour of eyes and the fluttering of hands
        in a foretaste of fancies and freaks,
When the thought of them deepens the dimples that laugh
        in the corners and curves of his cheeks.

As a bird when the music within her is yet
        too intense to be spoken in song,
That pauses a little for pleasure to feel
        how the notes from withinwards throng,
So pauses the laugh at his lips for a little,
        and waxes within more strong.

As the music elate and triumphal that bids
        all things of the dawn bear part
With the tune that prevails when her passion has risen
        into rapture of passionate art,
So lightens the laughter made perfect that leaps
        from its nest in the heaven of his heart.

Deep, grave and sedate is the gaze of expectant
        intensity bent for awhile
And absorbed on its aim as the tale that enthralls him
        uncovers the weft of its wile,
Till the goal of attention is touched, and expectancy
        kisses delight in a smile.

And it seems to us here that in Paradise hardly
        the spirit of Lamb or of Blake
May hear or behold aught sweeter than lightens
        and rings when his bright thoughts break
In laughter that well might lure them to look,
        and to smile as of old for his sake.

O singers that best loved children, and best
        for their sakes are beloved of us here,
In the world of your life everlasting, where love
        has no thorn and desire has no fear,
All else may be sweeter than aught is on earth,
        nought dearer than these are dear.




_MAYTIME IN MIDWINTER._


A new year gleams on us, tearful
  And troubled and smiling dim
As the smile on a lip still fearful,
  As glances of eyes that swim:
But the bird of my heart makes cheerful
  The days that are bright for him.

Child, how may a man's love merit
  The grace you shed as you stand,
The gift that is yours to inherit?
  Through you are the bleak days bland;
Your voice is a light to my spirit;
  You bring the sun in your hand.

The year's wing shows not a feather
  As yet of the plumes to be;
Yet here in the shrill grey weather
  The spring's self stands at my knee,
And laughs as we commune together,
  And lightens the world we see.

The rains are as dews for the christening
  Of dawns that the nights benumb:
The spring's voice answers me listening
  For speech of a child to come,
While promise of music is glistening
  On lips that delight keeps dumb.

The mists and the storms receding
  At sight of you smile and die:
Your eyes held wide on me reading
  Shed summer across the sky:
Your heart shines clear for me, heeding
  No more of the world than I.

The world, what is it to you, dear,
  And me, if its face be grey,
And the new-born year be a shrewd year
  For flowers that the fierce winds fray?
You smile, and the sky seems blue, dear;
  You laugh, and the month turns May.

Love cares not for care, he has daffed her
  Aside as a mate for guile:
The sight that my soul yearns after
  Feeds full my sense for awhile;
Your sweet little sun-faced laughter,
  Your good little glad grave smile.

Your hands through the bookshelves flutter;
  Scott, Shakespeare, Dickens, are caught;
Blake's visions, that lighten and mutter;
  Molière--and his smile has nought
Left on it of sorrow, to utter
  The secret things of his thought.

No grim thing written or graven
  But grows, if you gaze on it, bright;
A lark's note rings from the raven,
  And tragedy's robe turns white;
And shipwrecks drift into haven;
  And darkness laughs, and is light.

Grief seems but a vision of madness;
  Life's key-note peals from above
With nought in it more of sadness
  Than broods on the heart of a dove:
At sight of you, thought grows gladness,
  And life, through love of you, love.




_A DOUBLE BALLAD OF AUGUST._

(1884.)


All Afric, winged with death and fire,
Pants in our pleasant English air.
Each blade of grass is tense as wire,
And all the wood's loose trembling hair
Stark in the broad and breathless glare
Of hours whose touch wastes herb and tree.
This bright sharp death shines everywhere;
Life yearns for solace toward the sea.

Earth seems a corpse upon the pyre;
The sun, a scourge for slaves to bear.
All power to fear, all keen desire,
Lies dead as dreams of days that were
Before the new-born world lay bare
In heaven's wide eye, whereunder we
Lie breathless till the season spare:
Life yearns for solace toward the sea.

Fierce hours, with ravening fangs that tire
On spirit and sense, divide and share
The throbs of thoughts that scarce respire,
The throes of dreams that scarce forbear
One mute immitigable prayer
For cold perpetual sleep to be
Shed snowlike on the sense of care.
Life yearns for solace toward the sea.

The dust of ways where men suspire
Seems even the dust of death's dim lair.
But though the feverish days be dire
The sea-wind rears and cheers its fair
Blithe broods of babes that here and there
Make the sands laugh and glow for glee
With gladder flowers than gardens wear.
Life yearns for solace toward the sea.

The music dies not off the lyre
That lets no soul alive despair.
Sleep strikes not dumb the breathless choir
Of waves whose note bids sorrow spare.
As glad they sound, as fast they fare,
As when fate's word first set them free
And gave them light and night to wear.
Life yearns for solace toward the sea.

For there, though night and day conspire
To compass round with toil and snare
And changeless whirl of change, whose gyre
Draws all things deathwards unaware,
The spirit of life they scourge and scare,
Wild waves that follow on waves that flee
Laugh, knowing that yet, though earth despair,
Life yearns for solace toward the sea.




_HEARTSEASE COUNTRY._

TO ISABEL SWINBURNE.


The far green westward heavens are bland,
  The far green Wiltshire downs are clear
As these deep meadows hard at hand:
  The sight knows hardly far from near,
  Nor morning joy from evening cheer.
In cottage garden-plots their bees
Find many a fervent flower to seize
  And strain and drain the heart away
From ripe sweet-williams and sweet-peas
  At every turn on every way.

But gladliest seems one flower to expand
  Its whole sweet heart all round us here;
'Tis Heartsease Country, Pansy Land.
  Nor sounds nor savours harsh and drear
  Where engines yell and halt and veer
Can vex the sense of him who sees
One flower-plot midway, that for trees
  Has poles, and sheds all grimed or grey
For bowers like those that take the breeze
  At every turn on every way.

Content even there they smile and stand,
  Sweet thought's heart-easing flowers, nor fear,
With reek and roaring steam though fanned,
  Nor shrink nor perish as they peer.
  The heart's eye holds not those more dear
That glow between the lanes and leas
Where'er the homeliest hand may please
  To bid them blossom as they may
Where light approves and wind agrees
  At every turn on every way.

Sister, the word of winds and seas
Endures not as the word of these
  Your wayside flowers whose breath would say
How hearts that love may find heart's ease
  At every turn on every way.




_A BALLAD OF APPEAL._

TO CHRISTINA G. ROSSETTI.


Song wakes with every wakening year
  From hearts of birds that only feel
Brief spring's deciduous flower-time near:
  And song more strong to help or heal
  Shall silence worse than winter seal?
From love-lit thought's remurmuring cave
The notes that rippled, wave on wave,
  Were clear as love, as faith were strong;
And all souls blessed the soul that gave
  Sweet water from the well of song.

All hearts bore fruit of joy to hear,
  All eyes felt mist upon them steal
For joy's sake, trembling toward a tear,
  When, loud as marriage-bells that peal,
  Or flutelike soft, or keen like steel,
Sprang the sheer music; sharp or grave,
We heard the drift of winds that drave,
  And saw, swept round by ghosts in throng,
Dark rocks, that yielded, where they clave,
  Sweet water from the well of song.

Blithe verse made all the dim sense clear
  That smiles of babbling babes conceal:
Prayer's perfect heart spake here: and here
  Rose notes of blameless woe and weal,
  More soft than this poor song's appeal.
Where orchards bask, where cornfields wave,
They dropped like rains that cleanse and lave,
  And scattered all the year along,
Like dewfall on an April grave,
  Sweet water from the well of song.

Ballad, go bear our prayer, and crave
Pardon, because thy lowlier stave
  Can do this plea no right, but wrong.
Ask nought beside thy pardon, save
  Sweet water from the well of song.




_CRADLE SONGS._

(TO A TUNE OF BLAKE'S)


I.

Baby, baby bright,
Sleep can steal from sight
Little of your light:

Soft as fire in dew,
Still the life in you
Lights your slumber through.

Four white eyelids keep
Fast the seal of sleep
Deep as love is deep:

Yet, though closed it lies,
Love behind them spies
Heaven in two blue eyes.


II.

Baby, baby dear,
Earth and heaven are near
Now, for heaven is here.

Heaven is every place
Where your flower-sweet face
Fills our eyes with grace.

Till your own eyes deign
Earth a glance again,
Earth and heaven are twain.

Now your sleep is done,
Shine, and show the sun
Earth and heaven are one.


III.

Baby, baby sweet,
Love's own lips are meet
Scarce to kiss your feet.

Hardly love's own ear,
When your laugh crows clear,
Quite deserves to hear.

Hardly love's own wile,
Though it please awhile,
Quite deserves your smile.

Baby full of grace,
Bless us yet a space:
Sleep will come apace.


IV.

Baby, baby true,
Man, whate'er he do,
May deceive not you.

Smiles whose love is guile,
Worn a flattering while,
Win from you no smile.

One, the smile alone
Out of love's heart grown,
Ever wins your own.

Man, a dunce uncouth,
Errs in age and youth:
Babies know the truth.


V.

Baby, baby fair,
Love is fain to dare
Bless your haughtiest air.

Baby blithe and bland,
Reach but forth a hand
None may dare withstand;

Love, though wellnigh cowed,
Yet would praise aloud
Pride so sweetly proud.

No! the fitting word
Even from breeze or bird
Never yet was heard.


VI.

Baby, baby kind,
Though no word we find,
Bear us yet in mind.

Half a little hour,
Baby bright in bower,
Keep this thought aflower--

Love it is, I see,
Here with heart and knee
Bows and worships me.

What can baby do,
Then, for love so true?--
Let it worship you.


VII.

Baby, baby wise,
Love's divine surmise
Lights your constant eyes.

Day and night and day
One mute word would they,
As the soul saith, say.

Trouble comes and goes;
Wonder ebbs and flows;
Love remains and glows.

As the fledgeling dove
Feels the breast above,
So your heart feels love.




_PELAGIUS._


I.

The sea shall praise him and the shores bear part
  That reared him when the bright south world was black
  With fume of creeds more foul than hell's own rack,
Still darkening more love's face with loveless art
Since Paul, faith's fervent Antichrist, of heart
  Heroic, haled the world vehemently back
  From Christ's pure path on dire Jehovah's track,
And said to dark Elisha's Lord, 'Thou art.'
But one whose soul had put the raiment on
Of love that Jesus left with James and John
  Withstood that Lord whose seals of love were lies,
Seeing what we see--how, touched by Truth's bright rod,
The fiend whom Jews and Africans called God
  Feels his own hell take hold on him, and dies.


II.

The world has no such flower in any land,
  And no such pearl in any gulf the sea,
  As any babe on any mother's knee.
But all things blessed of men by saints are banned:
God gives them grace to read and understand
  The palimpsest of evil, writ where we,
  Poor fools and lovers but of love, can see
Nought save a blessing signed by Love's own hand.
The smile that opens heaven on us for them
  Hath sin's transmitted birthmark hid therein:
    The kiss it craves calls down from heaven a rod.
If innocence be sin that Gods condemn,
  Praise we the men who so being born in sin
    First dared the doom and broke the bonds of God.


III.

Man's heel is on the Almighty's neck who said,
  Let there be hell, and there was hell--on earth.
  But not for that may men forget their worth--
Nay, but much more remember them--who led
The living first from dwellings of the dead,
  And rent the cerecloths that were wont to engirth
  Souls wrapped and swathed and swaddled from their birth
With lies that bound them fast from heel to head.
Among the tombs when wise men all their lives
Dwelt, and cried out, and cut themselves with knives,
These men, being foolish, and of saints abhorred,
  Beheld in heaven the sun by saints reviled,
Love, and on earth one everlasting Lord
  In every likeness of a little child.




_LOUIS BLANC._

THREE SONNETS TO HIS MEMORY.


I.

The stainless soul that smiled through glorious eyes;
  The bright grave brow whereon dark fortune's blast
  Might blow, but might not bend it, nor o'ercast,
Save for one fierce fleet hour of shame, the skies
Thrilled with warm dreams of worthier days to rise
  And end the whole world's winter; here at last,
  If death be death, have passed into the past;
If death be life, live, though their semblance dies.
Hope and high faith inviolate of distrust
  Shone strong as life inviolate of the grave
    Through each bright word and lineament serene.
Most loving righteousness and love most just
  Crowned, as day crowns the dawn-enkindled wave,
    With visible aureole thine unfaltering mien.


II.

Strong time and fire-swift change, with lightnings clad
  And shod with thunders of reverberate years,
  Have filled with light and sound of hopes and fears
The space of many a season, since I had
Grace of good hap to make my spirit glad,
  Once communing with thine: and memory hears
  The bright voice yet that then rejoiced mine ears,
Sees yet the light of eyes that spake, and bade
Fear not, but hope, though then time's heart were weak
  And heaven by hell shade-stricken, and the range
  Of high-born hope made questionable and strange
As twilight trembling till the sunlight speak.
  Thou sawest the sunrise and the storm in one
  Break: seest thou now the storm-compelling sun?


III.

Surely thou seest, O spirit of light and fire,
  Surely thou canst not choose, O soul, but see
  The days whose dayspring was beheld of thee
Ere eyes less pure might have their hope's desire,
Beholding life in heaven again respire
  Where men saw nought that was or was to be,
  Save only death imperial. Thou and he
Who has the heart of all men's hearts for lyre,
Ye twain, being great of spirit as time is great,
  And sure of sight as truth's own heavenward eye,
  Beheld the forms of forces passing by
And certitude of equal-balanced fate,
Whose breath forefelt makes darkness palpitate,
  And knew that light should live and darkness die.




_VOS DEOS LAUDAMUS:_

THE CONSERVATIVE JOURNALIST'S ANTHEM.

'As a matter of fact, no man living, or who ever lived--not
CÆSAR or PERICLES, not SHAKESPEARE or MICHAEL ANGELO--could
confer honour more than he took on entering the House of
Lords.'--_Saturday Review_, December 15, 1883.

'Clumsy and shallow snobbery--can do no hurt.'--_Ibid._


I.

O Lords our Gods, beneficent, sublime,
  In the evening, and before the morning flames,
  We praise, we bless, we magnify your names.
The slave is he that serves not; his the crime
And shame, who hails not as the crown of Time
  That House wherein the all-envious world acclaims
  Such glory that the reflex of it shames
All crowns bestowed of men for prose or rhyme.
The serf, the cur, the sycophant is he
Who feels no cringing motion twitch his knee
  When from a height too high for Shakespeare nods
The wearer of a higher than Milton's crown.
Stoop, Chaucer, stoop: Keats, Shelley, Burns, bow down:
  These have no part with you, O Lords our Gods.


II.

O Lords our Gods, it is not that ye sit
  Serene above the thunder, and exempt
  From strife of tongues and casualties that tempt
Men merely found by proof of manhood fit
For service of their fellows: this is it
  Which sets you past the reach of Time's attempt,
  Which gives us right of justified contempt
For commonwealths built up by mere men's wit:
That gold unlocks not, nor may flatteries ope,
The portals of your heaven; that none may hope
  With you to watch how life beneath you plods,
Save for high service given, high duty done;
That never was your rank ignobly won:
  For this we give you praise, O Lords our Gods.


III.

O Lords our Gods, the times are evil: you
  Redeem the time, because of evil days.
  While abject souls in servitude of praise
Bow down to heads untitled, and the crew
Whose honour dwells but in the deeds they do,
  From loftier hearts your nobler servants raise
  More manful salutation: yours are bays
That not the dawn's plebeian pearls bedew;
Yours, laurels plucked not of such hands as wove
Old age its chaplet in Colonos' grove.
  Our time, with heaven and with itself at odds,
Makes all lands else as seas that seethe and boil;
But yours are yet the corn and wine and oil,
  And yours our worship yet, O Lords our Gods.

_December 15._




_ON THE BICENTENARY OF CORNEILLE_,

CELEBRATED UNDER THE PRESIDENCY OF VICTOR HUGO.


Scarce two hundred years are gone, and the world is past away
  As a noise of brawling wind, as a flash of breaking foam,
That beheld the singer born who raised up the dead of Rome;
  And a mightier now than he bids him too rise up to-day,
All the dim great age is dust, and its king is tombless clay,
  But its loftier laurel green as in living eyes it clomb,
  And his memory whom it crowned hath his people's heart for home,
And the shade across it falls of a lordlier-flowering bay.

Stately shapes about the tomb of their mighty maker pace,
Heads of high-plumed Spaniards shine, souls revive of Roman race,
Sound of arms and words of wail through the glowing darkness rise,
  Speech of hearts heroic rings forth of lips that know not breath,
And the light of thoughts august fills the pride of kindling eyes
  Whence of yore the spell of song drove the shadow of darkling death.




_IN SEPULCRETIS._

'Vidistis ipso rapere de rogo coenam.'--CATULLUS, LIX. 3.

'To publish even one line of an author which he himself has not
intended for the public at large--especially letters which are
addressed to private persons--is to commit a despicable act of
felony.'--HEINE.


I.

It is not then enough that men who give
  The best gifts given of man to man should feel,
  Alive, a snake's head ever at their heel:
Small hurt the worms may do them while they live--
Such hurt as scorn for scorn's sake may forgive.
  But now, when death and fame have set one seal
  On tombs whereat Love, Grief, and Glory kneel,
Men sift all secrets, in their critic sieve,
Of graves wherein the dust of death might shrink
  To know what tongues defile the dead man's name
  With loathsome love, and praise that stings like shame.
Rest once was theirs, who had crossed the mortal brink:
  No rest, no reverence now: dull fools undress
  Death's holiest shrine, life's veriest nakedness.


II.

A man was born, sang, suffered, loved, and died.
  Men scorned him living: let us praise him dead.
  His life was brief and bitter, gently led
And proudly, but with pure and blameless pride.
He wrought no wrong toward any; satisfied
  With love and labour, whence our souls are fed
  With largesse yet of living wine and bread.
Come, let us praise him: here is nought to hide.
Make bare the poor dead secrets of his heart,
  Strip the stark-naked soul, that all may peer,
  Spy, smirk, sniff, snap, snort, snivel, snarl, and sneer:
Let none so sad, let none so sacred part
  Lie still for pity, rest unstirred for shame,
  But all be scanned of all men. This is fame.


III.

'Now, what a thing it is to be an ass!'[1]
  If one, that strutted up the brawling streets
  As foreman of the flock whose concourse greets
Men's ears with bray more dissonant than brass,
Would change from blame to praise as coarse and crass
  His natural note, and learn the fawning feats
  Of lapdogs, who but knows what luck he meets?
But all in vain old fable holds her glass.

Mocked and reviled by men of poisonous breath,
  A great man dies: but one thing worst was spared,
  Not all his heart by their base hands lay bared.
One comes to crown with praise the dust of death;
  And lo, through him this worst is brought to pass.
  Now, what a thing it is to be an ass!

[Footnote 1: _Titus Andronicus_, Act iv., Scene 2.]


IV.

Shame, such as never yet dealt heavier stroke
  On heads more shameful, fall on theirs through whom
  Dead men may keep inviolate not their tomb,
But all its depths these ravenous grave-worms choke
And yet what waste of wrath were this, to invoke
  Shame on the shameless? Even their twin-born doom,
  Their native air of life, a carrion fume,
Their natural breath of love, a noisome smoke,
The bread they break, the cup whereof they drink,
  The record whose remembrance damns their name,
  Smells, tastes, and sounds of nothing but of shame.
If thankfulness nor pity bids them think
  What work is this of theirs, and pause betimes,
  Not Shakespeare's grave would scare them off with rhymes.




_LOVE AND SCORN._


I.

Love, loyallest and lordliest born of things,
  Immortal that shouldst be, though all else end,
  In plighted hearts of fearless friend with friend,
Whose hand may curb or clip thy plume-plucked wings?
Not grief's nor time's: though these be lords and kings
  Crowned, and their yoke bid vassal passions bend,
  They may not pierce the spirit of sense, or blend
Quick poison with the soul's live watersprings.
The true clear heart whose core is manful trust
Fears not that very death may turn to dust
  Love lit therein as toward a brother born,
If one touch make not all its fine gold rust,
  If one breath blight not all its glad ripe corn,
  And all its fire be turned to fire of scorn.


II.

Scorn only, scorn begot of bitter proof
  By keen experience of a trustless heart,
  Bears burning in her new-born hand the dart
Wherewith love dies heart-stricken, and the roof
Falls of his palace, and the storied woof
  Long woven of many a year with life's whole art
  Is rent like any rotten weed apart,
And hardly with reluctant eyes aloof
Cold memory guards one relic scarce exempt
Yet from the fierce corrosion of contempt,
  And hardly saved by pity. Woe are we
That once we loved, and love not; but we know
The ghost of love, surviving yet in show,
  Where scorn has passed, is vain as grief must be.


III.

O sacred, just, inevitable scorn,
  Strong child of righteous judgment, whom with grief
  The rent heart bears, and wins not yet relief,
Seeing of its pain so dire a portent born,
Must thou not spare one sheaf of all the corn,
  One doit of all the treasure? not one sheaf,
  Not one poor doit of all? not one dead leaf
Of all that fell and left behind a thorn?
Is man so strong that one should scorn another?
Is any as God, not made of mortal mother,
  That love should turn in him to gall and flame?
Nay: but the true is not the false heart's brother:
  Love cannot love disloyalty: the name
  That else it wears is love no more, but shame.




_ON THE DEATH OF RICHARD DOYLE._


A light of blameless laughter, fancy-bred,
  Soft-souled and glad and kind as love or sleep,
  Fades, and sweet mirth's own eyes are fain to weep
Because her blithe and gentlest bird is dead.
Weep, elves and fairies all, that never shed
  Tear yet for mortal mourning: you that keep
  The doors of dreams whence nought of ill may creep,
Mourn once for one whose lips your honey fed.
Let waters of the Golden River steep
  The rose-roots whence his grave blooms rosy-red
And murmuring of Hyblæan hives be deep
  About the summer silence of its bed,
And nought less gracious than a violet peep
  Between the grass grown greener round his head.




_IN MEMORY OF HENRY A. BRIGHT._


Yet again another, ere his crowning year,
  Gone from friends that here may look for him no more.
  Never now for him shall hope set wide the door,
Hope that hailed him hither, fain to greet him here.
All the gracious garden-flowers he held so dear,
  Oldworld English blossoms, all his homestead store,
  Oldworld grief had strewn them round his bier of yore,
Bidding each drop leaf by leaf as tear by tear;
Rarer lutes than mine had borne more tuneful token,
  Touched by subtler hands than echoing time can wrong,
  Sweet as flowers had strewn his graveward path along.
Now may no such old sweet dirges more be spoken,
Now the flowers whose breath was very song are broken,
  Nor may sorrow find again so sweet a song.




_A SOLITUDE._


Sea beyond sea, sand after sweep of sand,
  Here ivory smooth, here cloven and ridged with flow
  Of channelled waters soft as rain or snow,
Stretch their lone length at ease beneath the bland
Grey gleam of skies whose smile on wave and strand
  Shines weary like a man's who smiles to know
  That now no dream can mock his faith with show,
Nor cloud for him seem living sea or land.

Is there an end at all of all this waste,
These crumbling cliffs defeatured and defaced,
These ruinous heights of sea-sapped walls that slide
  Seaward with all their banks of bleak blown flowers
Glad yet of life, ere yet their hope subside
  Beneath the coil of dull dense waves and hours?




_VICTOR HUGO: L'ARCHIPEL DE LA MANCHE._


Sea and land are fairer now, nor aught is all the same,
  Since a mightier hand than Time's hath woven their votive wreath.
Rocks as swords half drawn from out the smooth wave's jewelled sheath,
Fields whose flowers a tongue divine hath numbered name by name,
Shores whereby the midnight or the noon clothed round with flame
Hears the clamour jar and grind which utters from beneath
  Cries of hungering waves like beasts fast bound that gnash their teeth,
All of these the sun that lights them lights not like his fame;
None of these is but the thing it was before he came
  Where the darkling overfalls like dens of torment seethe,
High on tameless moorlands, down in meadows bland and tame,
  Where the garden hides, and where the wind uproots the heath,
Glory now henceforth for ever, while the world shall be,
Shines, a star that keeps not time with change on earth and sea.




_THE TWILIGHT OF THE LORDS._


I.

Is the sound a trumpet blown, or a bell for burial tolled,
  Whence the whole air vibrates now to the clash of words like swords--
  'Let us break their bonds in sunder, and cast away their cords;
Long enough the world has mocked us, and marvelled to behold
How the grown man bears the curb whence his boyhood was controlled'?
  Nay, but hearken: surer counsel more sober speech affords:
  'Is the past not all inscribed with the praises of our Lords?
Is the memory dead of deeds done of yore, the love grown cold
That should bind our hearts to trust in their counsels wise and bold?
  These that stand against you now, senseless crowds and heartless hordes,
Are not these the sons of men that withstood your kings of old?
  Theirs it is to bind and loose; theirs the key that knows the wards,
Theirs the staff to lead or smite; yours, the spades and ploughs and hods:
Theirs to hear and yours to cry, Power is yours, O Lords our Gods.'


II.

Hear, O England: these are they that would counsel thee aright.
  Wouldst thou fain have all thy sons sons of thine indeed, and free?
  Nay, but then no more at all as thou hast been shalt thou be:
Needs must many dwell in darkness, that some may look on light;
Needs must poor men brook the wrong that ensures the rich man's right.
  How shall kings and lords be worshipped, if no man bow the knee?
  How, if no man worship these, may thy praise endure with thee?
How, except thou trust in these, shall thy name not lose its might?
These have had their will of thee since the Norman came to smite:
  Sires on grandsires, even as wave after wave along the sea,
Sons on sires have followed, steadfast as clouds or hours in flight.
  Time alone hath power to say, time alone hath eyes to see,
If your walls of rule be built but of clay-compacted sods,
If your place of old shall know you no more, O Lords our Gods.


III.

Through the stalls wherein ye sit sounds a sentence while we wait,
  Set your house in order: is it not builded on the sand?
  Set your house in order, seeing the night is hard at hand.
As the twilight of the Gods in the northern dream of fate
Is this hour that comes against you, albeit this hour come late.
  Ye whom Time and Truth bade heed, and ye would not understand,
  Now an axe draws nigh the tree overshadowing all the land,
And its edge of doom is set to the root of all your state.
Light is more than darkness now, faith than fear and hope than hate,
  And what morning wills, behold, all the night shall not withstand.
Rods of office, helms of rule, staffs of wise men, crowns of great,
  While the people willed, ye bare; now their hopes and hearts expand,
Time with silent foot makes dust of your broken crowns and rods,
And the lordship of your godhead is gone, O Lords our Gods.




_CLEAR THE WAY!_


Clear the way, my lords and lackeys! you have had your day.
Here you have your answer--England's yea against your nay:
Long enough your house has held you: up, and clear the way!

Lust and falsehood, craft and traffic, precedent and gold,
Tongue of courtier, kiss of harlot, promise bought and sold,
Gave you heritage of empire over thralls of old.

Now that all these things are rotten, all their gold is rust,
Quenched the pride they lived by, dead the faith and cold the lust,
Shall their heritage not also turn again to dust?

By the grace of these they reigned, who left their sons their sway:
By the grace of these, what England says her lords unsay:
Till at last her cry go forth against them--Clear the way!

By the grace of trust in treason knaves have lived and lied:
By the force of fear and folly fools have fed their pride:
By the strength of sloth and custom reason stands defied.

Lest perchance your reckoning on some latter day be worse,
Halt and hearken, lords of land and princes of the purse,
Ere the tide be full that comes with blessing and with curse.

Where we stand; as where you sit, scarce falls a sprinkling spray;
But the wind that swells, the wave that follows, none shall stay:
Spread no more of sail for shipwreck: out, and clear the way!




_A WORD FOR THE COUNTRY._


Men, born of the land that for ages
  Has been honoured where freedom was dear,
Till your labour wax fat on its wages
  You shall never be peers of a peer.
      Where might is, the right is:
        Long purses make strong swords.
      Let weakness learn meekness:
        God save the House of Lords!

You are free to consume in stagnation:
  You are equal in right to obey:
You are brothers in bonds, and the nation
  Is your mother--whose sons are her prey.
      Those others your brothers,
        Who toil not, weave, nor till,
      Refuse you and use you
        As waiters on their will.

But your fathers bowed down to their masters
  And obeyed them and served and adored.
Shall the sheep not give thanks to their pastors?
  Shall the serf not give praise to his lord?
      Time, waning and gaining,
        Grown other now than then,
      Needs pastors and masters
        For sheep, and not for men.

If his grandsire did service in battle,
  If his grandam was kissed by a king,
Must men to my lord be as cattle
  Or as apes that he leads in a string?
      To deem so, to dream so,
        Would bid the world proclaim
      The dastards for bastards,
        Not heirs of England's fame.

Not in spite but in right of dishonour,
  There are actors who trample your boards
Till the earth that endures you upon her
  Grows weary to bear you, my lords.
      Your token is broken,
        It will not pass for gold:
      Your glory looks hoary,
        Your sun in heaven turns cold.

They are worthy to reign on their brothers,
  To contemn them as clods and as carles,
Who are Graces by grace of such mothers
  As brightened the bed of King Charles.
      What manner of banner,
        What fame is this they flaunt,
      That Britain, soul-smitten,
        Should shrink before their vaunt?

Bright sons of sublime prostitution,
  You are made of the mire of the street
Where your grandmothers walked in pollution
  Till a coronet shone at their feet.
      Your Graces, whose faces
        Bear high the bastard's brand,
      Seem stronger no longer
        Than all this honest land.

But the sons of her soldiers and seamen,
  They are worthy forsooth of their hire.
If the father won praise from all free men,
  Shall the sons not exult in their sire?
      Let money make sunny
        And power make proud their lives,
      And feed them and breed them
        Like drones in drowsiest hives.

But if haply the name be a burden
  And the souls be no kindred of theirs,
Should wise men rejoice in such guerdon
  Or brave men exult in such heirs?
      Or rather the father
        Frown, shamefaced, on the son,
      And no men but foemen,
        Deriding, cry 'Well done'?

Let the gold and the land they inherit
  Pass ever from hand into hand:
In right of the forefather's merit
  Let the gold be the son's, and the land.
      Soft raiment, rich payment,
        High place, the state affords;
      Full measure of pleasure,
        But now no more, my lords.

Is the future beleaguered with dangers
  If the poor be far other than slaves?
Shall the sons of the land be as strangers
  In the land of their forefathers' graves?
      Shame were it to bear it,
        And shame it were to see:
      If free men you be, men,
        Let proof proclaim you free.

'But democracy means dissolution:
  See, laden with clamour and crime,
How the darkness of dim revolution
  Comes deepening the twilight of time!
      Ah, better the fetter
        That holds the poor man's hand
      Than peril of sterile
        Blind change that wastes the land.

'Gaze forward through clouds that environ;
  It shall be as it was in the past.
Not with dreams, but with blood and with iron,
  Shall a nation be moulded to last.'
      So teach they, so preach they,
        Who dream themselves the dream
      That hallows the gallows
        And bids the scaffold stream.

'With a hero at head, and a nation
  Well gagged and well drilled and well cowed,
And a gospel of war and damnation,
  Has not empire a right to be proud?
      Fools prattle and tattle
        Of freedom, reason, right,
      The beauty of duty,
        The loveliness of light.

'But we know, we believe it, we see it,
  Force only has power upon earth.'
So be it! and ever so be it
  For souls that are bestial by birth!
      Let Prussian with Russian
        Exchange the kiss of slaves:
      But sea-folk are free folk
        By grace of winds and waves.

Has the past from the sepulchres beckoned?
  Let answer from Englishmen be--
No man shall be lord of us reckoned
  Who is baser, not better, than we.
      No coward, empowered
        To soil a brave man's name;
      For shame's sake and fame's sake,
        Enough of fame and shame.

Fame needs not the golden addition;
  Shame bears it abroad as a brand.
Let the deed, and no more the tradition,
  Speak out and be heard through the land.
      Pride, rootless and fruitless,
        No longer takes and gives:
      But surer and purer
        The soul of England lives.

He is master and lord of his brothers
  Who is worthier and wiser than they.
Him only, him surely, shall others,
  Else equal, observe and obey.
      Truth, flawless and awless,
        Do falsehood what it can,
      Makes royal the loyal
        And simple heart of man.

Who are these, then, that England should hearken,
  Who rage and wax wroth and grow pale
If she turn from the sunsets that darken
  And her ship for the morning set sail?
      Let strangers fear dangers:
        All know, that hold her dear,
      Dishonour upon her
        Can only fall through fear.

Men, born of the landsmen and seamen
  Who served her with souls and with swords,
She bids you be brothers, and free men,
  And lordless, and fearless of lords.
      She cares not, she dares not
        Care now for gold or steel:
      Light lead her, truth speed her,
        God save the Commonweal!




_A WORD FOR THE NATION._


I.

A word across the water
  Against our ears is borne,
Of threatenings and of slaughter,
  Of rage and spite and scorn:
We have not, alack, an ally to befriend us,
And the season is ripe to extirpate and end us:
Let the German touch hands with the Gaul,
And the fortress of England must fall;
And the sea shall be swept of her seamen,
  And the waters they ruled be their graves,
And Dutchmen and Frenchmen be free men,
        And Englishmen slaves.


II.

Our time once more is over,
  Once more our end is near:
A bull without a drover,
  The Briton reels to rear,
And the van of the nations is held by his betters,
And the seas of the world shall be loosed from his fetters,
And his glory shall pass as a breath,
And the life that is in him be death;
And the sepulchre sealed on his glory
  For a sign to the nations shall be
As of Tyre and of Carthage in story,
        Once lords of the sea.


III.

The lips are wise and loyal,
  The hearts are brave and true,
Imperial thoughts and royal
  Make strong the clamorous crew,
Whence louder and prouder the noise of defiance
Rings rage from the grave of a trustless alliance,
And bids us beware and be warned,
As abhorred of all nations and scorned,
As a swordless and spiritless nation,
  A wreck on the waste of the waves.
So foams the released indignation
        Of masterless slaves.


IV.

Brute throats that miss the collar,
  Bowed backs that ask the whip,
Stretched hands that lack the dollar,
  And many a lie-seared lip,
Forefeel and foreshow for us signs as funereal
As the signs that were regal of yore and imperial;
We shall pass as the princes they served,
We shall reap what our fathers deserved,
And the place that was England's be taken
  By one that is worthier than she,
And the yoke of her empire be shaken
        Like spray from the sea.


V.

French hounds, whose necks are aching
  Still from the chain they crave,
In dog-day madness breaking
  The dog-leash, thus may rave:
But the seas that for ages have fostered and fenced her
Laugh, echoing the yell of their kennel against her
And their moan if destruction draw near them
And the roar of her laughter to hear them;
For she knows that if Englishmen be men
  Their England has all that she craves;
All love and all honour from free men,
        All hatred from slaves.


VI.

All love that rests upon her
  Like sunshine and sweet air,
All light of perfect honour
  And praise that ends in prayer,
She wins not more surely, she wears not more proudly,
Than the token of tribute that clatters thus loudly,
The tribute of foes when they meet
That rattles and rings at her feet,
The tribute of rage and of rancour,
  The tribute of slaves to the free,
To the people whose hope hath its anchor
        Made fast in the sea.


VII.

No fool that bows the back he
  Feels fit for scourge or brand,
No scurril scribes that lackey
  The lords of Lackeyland,
No penman that yearns, as he turns on his pallet,
For the place or the pence of a peer or a valet,
No whelp of as currish a pack
As the litter whose yelp it gives back,
Though he answer the cry of his brother
  As echoes might answer from caves,
Shall be witness as though for a mother
        Whose children were slaves.


VIII.

But those found fit to love her,
  Whose love has root in faith,
Who hear, though darkness cover
  Time's face, what memory saith,
Who seek not the service of great men or small men
But the weal that is common for comfort of all men,
Those yet that in trust have beholden
Truth's dawn over England grow golden
And quicken the darkness that stagnates
  And scatter the shadows that flee,
Shall reply for her meanest as magnates
        And masters by sea.


IX.

And all shall mark her station,
  Her message all shall hear,
When, equal-eyed, the nation
  Bids all her sons draw near,
And freedom be more than tradition or faction,
And thought be no swifter to serve her than action,
And justice alone be above her,
That love may be prouder to love her,
And time on the crest of her story
  Inscribe, as remembrance engraves,
The sign that subdues with its glory
        Kings, princes, and slaves.




_A WORD FROM THE PSALMIST._

PS. XCIV. 8.


I.

    'Take heed, ye unwise among the people:
      O ye fools, when will ye understand?'
    From pulpit or choir beneath the steeple,
      Though the words be fierce, the tones are bland.
But a louder than the Church's echo thunders
  In the ears of men who may not choose but hear,
And the heart in him that hears it leaps and wonders,
  With triumphant hope astonished, or with fear
    For the names whose sound was power awaken
      Neither love nor reverence now nor dread;
    Their strongholds and shrines are stormed and taken,
      Their kingdom and all its works are dead.


II.

    Take heed: for the tide of time is risen:
      It is full not yet, though now so high
    That spirits and hopes long pent in prison
      Feel round them a sense of freedom nigh,
And a savour keen and sweet of brine and billow,
  And a murmur deep and strong of deepening strength.
Though the watchman dream, with sloth or pride for pillow,
  And the night be long, not endless is its length.
    From the springs of dawn, from clouds that sever
      From the equal heavens and the eastward sea,
    The witness comes that endures for ever,
      Till men be brethren and thralls be free.


III.

    But the wind of the wings of dawn expanding
      Strikes chill on your hearts as change and death.
    Ye are old, but ye have not understanding,
      And proud, but your pride is a dead man's breath.
And your wise men, toward whose words and signs ye hearken,
  And your strong men, in whose hands ye put your trust,
Strain eyes to behold but clouds and dreams that darken,
  Stretch hands that can find but weapons red with rust.
    Their watchword rings, and the night rejoices,
      But the lark's note laughs at the night-bird's notes--
    'Is virtue verily found in voices?
      Or is wisdom won when all win votes?


IV.

    'Take heed, ye unwise indeed, who listen
      When the wind's wings beat and shift and change;
    Whose hearts are uplift, whose eyeballs glisten,
      With desire of new things great and strange.
Let not dreams misguide nor any visions wrong you:
  That which has been, it is now as it was then.
Is not Compromise of old a god among you?
  Is not Precedent indeed a king of men?
    But the windy hopes that lead mislead you,
      And the sounds ye hear are void and vain.
    Is a vote a coat? will franchise feed you,
      Or words be a roof against the rain?


V.

    'Eight ages are gone since kingship entered,
      With knights and peers at its harnessed back,
    And the land, no more in its own strength centred,
      Was cast for a prey to the princely pack.
But we pared the fangs and clipped the ravening claws of it,
  And good was in time brought forth of an evil thing,
And the land's high name waxed lordlier in war because of it,
  When chartered Right had bridled and curbed the king.
    And what so fair has the world beholden,
      And what so firm has withstood the years,
    As Monarchy bound in chains all golden,
      And Freedom guarded about with peers?


VI.

    'How think ye? know not your lords and masters
      What collars are meet for brawling throats?
    Is change not mother of strange disasters?
      Shall plague or peril be stayed by votes?
Out of precedent and privilege and order
  Have we plucked the flower of compromise, whose root
Bears blossoms that shine from border again to border,
  And the mouths of many are fed with its temperate fruit.
    Your masters are wiser than ye, their henchmen:
      Your lords know surely whereof ye have need.
    Equality? Fools, would you fain be Frenchmen?
      Is equity more than a word indeed?


VII.

    'Your voices, forsooth, your most sweet voices,
      Your worthy voices, your love, your hate,
    Your choice, who know not whereof your choice is,
      What stays are these for a stable state?
Inconstancy, blind and deaf with its own fierce babble,
  Swells ever your throats with storm of uncertain cheers:
He leans on straws who leans on a light-souled rabble;
  His trust is frail who puts not his trust in peers.'
    So shrills the message whose word convinces
      Of righteousness knaves, of wisdom fools;
    That serfs may boast them because of princes,
      And the weak rejoice that the strong man rules.


VIII.

    True friends, ye people, are these, the faction
      Full-mouthed that flatters and snails and bays,
    That fawns and foams with alternate action,
      And mocks the names that it soils with praise.
As from fraud and force their power had fast beginning,
  So by righteousness and peace it may not stand,
But by craft of state and nets of secret spinning,
  Words that weave and unweave wiles like ropes of sand
    Form, custom, and gold, and laws grown hoary,
      And strong tradition that guards the gate:
    To these, O people, to these give glory,
      That your name among nations may be great.


IX.

  How long--for haply not now much longer--
    Shall fear put faith in a faithless creed,
  And shapes and shadows of truths be stronger
    In strong men's eyes than the truth indeed?
If freedom be not a word that dies when spoken,
  If justice be not a dream whence men must wake,
How shall not the bonds of the thraldom of old be broken,
  And right put might in the hands of them that break?
    For clear as a tocsin from the steeple
      Is the cry gone forth along the land,
    Take heed, ye unwise among the people:
      O ye fools, when will ye understand?




_A BALLAD AT PARTING._


Sea to sea that clasps and fosters England, uttering ever-more
Song eterne and praise immortal of the indomitable shore,
  Lifts aloud her constant heart up, south to north and east to west,
Here in speech that shames all music, there in thunder-throated roar,
  Chiming concord out of discord, waking rapture out of rest.
All her ways are lovely, all her works and symbols are divine,
  Yet shall man love best what first bade leap his heart and bend his knee;
Yet where first his whole soul worshipped shall his soul set up her shrine:
  Nor may love not know the lovelier, fair as both beheld may be,
  Here the limitless north-eastern, there the strait south-western sea.

Though their chant bear all one burden, as ere man was born it bore;
Though the burden be diviner than the songs all souls adore;
  Yet may love not choose but choose between them which to love the best.
Me the sea my nursing-mother, me the Channel green and hoar,
  Holds at heart more fast than all things, bares for me the goodlier breast,
Lifts for me the lordlier love-song, bids for me more sunlight shine,
  Sounds for me the stormier trumpet of the sweeter strain to me.
So the broad pale Thames is loved not like the tawny springs of Tyne:
  Choice is clear between them for the soul whose vision holds in fee
  Here the limitless north-eastern, there the strait south-western sea.

Choice is clear, but dear is either; nor has either not in store
Many a likeness, many a written sign of spirit-searching lore,
  Whence the soul takes fire of sweet remembrance, magnified and blest.
Thought of songs whose flame-winged feet have trod the unfooted water-floor
  When the lord of all the living lords of souls bade speed their quest,
Soft live sound like children's babble down the rippling sand's incline,
  Or the lovely song that loves them, hailed with thankful prayer and plea;
These are parcels of the harvest here whose gathered sheaves are mine,
  Garnered now, but sown and reaped where winds make wild with wrath or glee
  Here the limitless north-eastern, there the strait south-western sea.

Song, thy name is freedom, seeing thy strength was born of breeze and brine.
  Fare now forth and fear no fortune; such a seal is set on thee.
Joy begat and memory bare thee, seeing in spirit a two-fold sign,
  Even the sign of those thy fosters, each as thou from all time free,
  Here the limitless north-eastern, there the strait south-western sea.




                   PRINTED BY
    SPOTTISWOODE AND CO., NEW-STREET SQUARE
                     LONDON






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of A Midsummer Holiday and Other Poems, by 
Algernon Charles Swinburne

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK A MIDSUMMER HOLIDAY AND ***

***** This file should be named 18424-8.txt or 18424-8.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/1/8/4/2/18424/

Produced by Chuck Greif, Louise Hope, Thierry Alberto,
Henry Craig and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team
at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

*** END: FULL LICENSE ***


﻿The Project Gutenberg EBook of Studies in Song, by Algernon Charles Swinburne

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Studies in Song

Author: Algernon Charles Swinburne

Release Date: October 31, 2005 [EBook #16973]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK STUDIES IN SONG ***




Produced by Thierry Alberto, Annika Feilbach and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









STUDIES IN SONG

BY

ALGERNON CHARLES SWINBURNE


London
CHATTO & WINDUS, PICCADILLY
1880

_All rights reserved_

LONDON: PRINTED BY
SPOTTISWOODE AND CO., NEW-STREET SQUARE
AND PARLIAMENT STREET




CONTENTS.


                                                                    PAGE
SONG FOR THE CENTENARY OF WALTER SAVAGE LANDOR                         1

GRAND CHORUS OF BIRDS FROM ARISTOPHANES                               67

OFF SHORE                                                             75

AFTER NINE YEARS                                                      95

FOR A PORTRAIT OF FELICE ORSINI                                      103

EVENING ON THE BROADS                                                107

THE EMPEROR'S PROGRESS                                               125

THE RESURRECTION OF ALCILIA                                          131

THE FOURTEENTH OF JULY                                               135

THE LAUNCH OF THE LIVADIA                                            139

SIX YEARS OLD                                                        145

A PARTING SONG                                                       151

BY THE NORTH SEA                                                     161





SONG FOR THE CENTENARY OF WALTER SAVAGE LANDOR

BORN JANUARY 30TH, 1775

DIED SEPTEMBER 17TH, 1864


There is delight in singing, though none hear
Beside the singer: and there is delight
In praising, though the praiser sit alone
And see the praised far off him, far above.

                                       LANDOR.




DEDICATION.

TO MRS. LYNN LINTON.


_Daughter in spirit elect and consecrate
  By love and reverence of the Olympian sire
Whom I too loved and worshipped, seeing so great,
  And found so gracious toward my long desire
To bid that love in song before his gate
  Sound, and my lute be loyal to his lyre,
To none save one it now may dedicate
  Song's new burnt-offering on a century's pyre.
      And though the gift be light
      As ashes in men's sight,
  Left by the flame of no ethereal fire,
      Yet, for his worthier sake
      Than words are worthless, take
  This wreath of words ere yet their hour expire:
    So, haply, from some heaven above,
He, seeing, may set next yours my sacrifice of love._

_May 24, 1880._




_SONG FOR THE CENTENARY OF WALTER SAVAGE LANDOR._


1.

Five years beyond an hundred years have seen
  Their winters, white as faith's and age's hue,
Melt, smiling through brief tears that broke between,
  And hope's young conquering colours reared anew,
Since, on the day whose edge for kings made keen
  Smote sharper once than ever storm-wind blew,
A head predestined for the girdling green
  That laughs at lightning all the seasons through,
      Nor frost or change can sunder
      Its crown untouched of thunder
Leaf from least leaf of all its leaves that grew
      Alone for brows too bold
      For storm to sear of old,
  Elect to shine in time's eternal view,
    Rose on the verge of radiant life
Between the winds and sunbeams mingling love with strife.


2.

The darkling day that gave its bloodred birth
  To Milton's white republic undefiled
That might endure so few fleet years on earth
  Bore in him likewise as divine a child;
But born not less for crowns of love and mirth,
  Of palm and myrtle passionate and mild,
The leaf that girds about with gentler girth
  The brow steel-bound in battle, and the wild
Soft spray that flowers above
      The flower-soft hair of love;
  And the white lips of wayworn winter smiled
      And grew serene as spring's
      When with stretched clouds like wings
  Or wings like drift of snow-clouds massed and piled
    The godlike giant, softening, spread
A shadow of stormy shelter round the new-born head.


3.

And o'er it brightening bowed the wild-haired hour,
  And touched his tongue with honey and with fire,
And breathed between his lips the note of power
  That makes of all the winds of heaven a lyre
Whose strings are stretched from topmost peaks that tower
To softest springs of waters that suspire,
With sounds too dim to shake the lowliest flower
  Breathless with hope and dauntless with desire:
      And bright before his face
      That Hour became a Grace,
  As in the light of their Athenian quire
      When the Hours before the sun
      And Graces were made one,
  Called by sweet Love down from the aerial gyre
    By one dear name of natural joy,
To bear on her bright breast from heaven a heaven-born boy.


4.

Ere light could kiss the little lids in sunder
  Or love could lift them for the sun to smite,
His fiery birth-star as a sign of wonder
  Had risen, perplexing the presageful night
With shadow and glory around her sphere and under
  And portents prophesying by sound and sight;
And half the sound was song and half was thunder,
  And half his life of lightning, half of light:
      And in the soft clenched hand
      Shone like a burning brand
  A shadowy sword for swordless fields of fight,
      Wrought only for such lord
      As so may wield the sword
  That all things ill be put to fear and flight
    Even at the flash and sweep and gleam
Of one swift stroke beheld but in a shuddering dream.


5.

Like the sun's rays that blind the night's wild beasts
  The sword of song shines as the swordsman sings;
From the west wind's verge even to the arduous east's
  The splendour of the shadow that it flings
Makes fire and storm in heaven above the feasts
  Of men fulfilled with food of evil things;
Strikes dumb the lying and hungering lips of priests,
  Smites dead the slaying and ravening hands of kings;
      Turns dark the lamp's hot light,
      And turns the darkness bright
  As with the shadow of dawn's reverberate wings;
      And far before its way
      Heaven, yearning toward the day,
  Shines with its thunder and round its lightning rings;
    And never hand yet earlier played
With that keen sword whose hilt is cloud, and fire its blade.


6.

As dropping flakes of honey-heavy dew
  More soft than slumber's, fell the first note's sound
From strings the swift young hand strayed lightlier through
  Than leaves through calm air wheeling toward the ground
Stray down the drifting wind when skies are blue
  Nor yet the wings of latter winds unbound,
Ere winter loosen all the Æolian crew
  With storm unleashed behind them like a hound.
      As lightly rose and sank
      Beside a green-flowered bank
  The clear first notes his burning boyhood found
      To sing her sacred praise
      Who rode her city's ways
  Clothed with bright hair and with high purpose crowned;
    A song of soft presageful breath,
Prefiguring all his love and faith in life and death;


7.

Who should love two things only and only praise
  More than all else for ever: even the glory
Of goodly beauty in women, whence all days
  Take light whereby death's self seems transitory;
And loftier love than loveliest eyes can raise,
  Love that wipes off the miry stains and gory
From Time's worn feet, besmirched on bloodred ways,
  And lightens with his light the night of story;
      Love that lifts up from dust
      Life, and makes darkness just,
  And purges as with fire of purgatory
      The dense disastrous air,
      To burn old falsehood bare
  And give the wind its ashes heaped and hoary;
    Love, that with eyes of ageless youth
Sees on the breast of Freedom borne her nursling Truth.


8.

For at his birth the sistering stars were one
  That flamed upon it as one fiery star;
Freedom, whose light makes pale the mounting sun,
  And Song, whose fires are quenched when Freedom's are.
Of all that love not liberty let none
  Love her that fills our lips with fire from far
To mix with winds and seas in unison
  And sound athwart life's tideless harbour-bar
      Out where our songs fly free
      Across time's bounded sea,
  A boundless flight beyond the dim sun's car,
      Till all the spheres of night
      Chime concord round their flight
  Too loud for blasts of warring change to mar,
    From stars that sang for Homer's birth
To these that gave our Landor welcome back from earth


9.

Shine, as above his cradle, on his grave,
  Stars of our worship, lights of our desire!
For never man that heard the world's wind rave
  To you was truer in trust of heart and lyre:
Nor Greece nor England on a brow more brave
  Beheld your flame against the wind burn higher:
Nor all the gusts that blanch life's worldly wave
  With surf and surge could quench its flawless fire:
      No blast of all that blow
      Might bid the torch burn low
  That lightens on us yet as o'er his pyre,
      Indomitable of storm,
      That now no flaws deform
  Nor thwart winds baffle ere it all aspire,
    One light of godlike breath and flame,
To write on heaven with man's most glorious names his name.


10.

The very dawn was dashed with stormy dew
  And freaked with fire as when God's hand would mar
Palaces reared of tyrants, and the blue
  Deep heaven was kindled round her thunderous car,
That saw how swift a gathering glory grew
  About him risen, ere clouds could blind or bar
A splendour strong to burn and burst them through
  And mix in one sheer light things near and far.
      First flew before his path
      Light shafts of love and wrath,
  But winged and edged as elder warriors' are;
      Then rose a light that showed
      Across the midsea road
  From radiant Calpe to revealed Masar
    The way of war and love and fate
Between the goals of fear and fortune, hope and hate.


11.

Mine own twice banished fathers' harbour-land,
  Their nursing-mother France, the well-beloved,
By the arduous blast of sanguine sunrise fanned,
  Flamed on him, and his burning lips were moved
As that live statue's throned on Lybian sand
  When morning moves it, ere her light faith roved
From promise, and her tyrant's poisonous hand
  Fed hope with Corsic honey till she proved
      More deadly than despair
      And falser even than fair,
  Though fairer than all elder hopes removed
      As landmarks by the crime
      Of inundating time;
  Light faith by grief too loud too long reproved:
    For even as in some darkling dance
Wronged love changed hands with hate, and turned his heart from France.


12.

But past the snows and summits Pyrenean
  Love stronger-winged held more prevailing flight
That o'er Tyrrhene, Iberian, and Ægean
  Shores lightened with one storm of sound and light.
From earliest even to hoariest years one pæan
  Rang rapture through the fluctuant roar of fight,
From Nestor's tongue in accents Achillean
  On death's blind verge dominant over night
      For voice as hand and hand
      As voice for one fair land
  Rose radiant, smote sonorous, past the height
      Where darkling pines enrobe
      The steel-cold Lake of Gaube,
  Deep as dark death and keen as death to smite,
    To where on peak or moor or plain
His heart and song and sword were one to strike for Spain.


13.

Resurgent at his lifted voice and hand
  Pale in the light of war or treacherous fate
Song bade before him all their shadows stand
  For whom his will unbarred their funeral grate.
The father by whose wrong revenged his land
  Was given for sword and fire to desolate
Rose fire-encircled as a burning brand,
  Great as the woes he wrought and bore were great.
      Fair as she smiled and died,
      Death's crowned and breathless bride
  Smiled as one living even on craft and hate:
      And pity, a star unrisen,
      Scarce lit Ferrante's prison
  Ere night unnatural closed the natural gate
    That gave their life and love and light
To those fair eyes despoiled by fratricide of sight.


14.

Tears bright and sweet as fire and incense fell
  In perfect notes of music-measured pain
On veiled sweet heads that heard not love's farewell
  Sob through the song that bade them rise again;
Rise in the light of living song, to dwell
  With memories crowned of memory: so the strain
Made soft as heaven the stream that girdles hell
  And sweet the darkness of the breathless plain,
      And with Elysian flowers
      Recrowned the wreathless hours
  That mused and mourned upon their works in vain;
      For all their works of death
      Song filled with light and breath,
  And listening grief relaxed her lightening chain;
    For sweet as all the wide sweet south
She found the song like honey from the lion's mouth.


15.

High from his throne in heaven Simonides,
  Crowned with mild aureole of memorial tears
That the everlasting sun of all time sees
  All golden, molten from the forge of years,
Smiled, as the gift was laid upon his knees
  Of songs that hang like pearls in mourners' ears,
Mild as the murmuring of Hymettian bees
  And honied as their harvest, that endears
      The toil of flowery days;
      And smiling perfect praise
  Hailed his one brother mateless else of peers:
      Whom we that hear not him
      For length of date grown dim
  Hear, and the heart grows glad of grief that hears;
    And harshest heights of sorrowing hours,
Like snows of Alpine April, melt from tears to flowers.


16.

Therefore to him the shadow of death was none,
  The darkness was not, nor the temporal tomb:
And multitudinous time for him was one,
  Who bade before his equal seat of doom
Rise and stand up for judgment in the sun
  The weavers of the world's large-historied loom,
By their own works of light or darkness done
  Clothed round with light or girt about with gloom.
      In speech of purer gold
      Than even they spake of old
  He bade the breath of Sidney's lips relume
      The fire of thought and love
      That made his bright life move
  Through fair brief seasons of benignant bloom
    To blameless music ever, strong
As death and sweet as death-annihilating song.


17.

Thought gave his wings the width of time to roam,
  Love gave his thought strength equal to release
From bonds of old forgetful years, like foam
  Vanished, the fame of memories that decrease;
So strongly faith had fledged for flight from home
  The soul's large pinions till her strife should cease:
And through the trumpet of a child of Rome
  Rang the pure music of the flutes of Greece.
      As though some northern hand
      Reft from the Latin land
  A spoil more costly than the Colchian fleece
      To clothe with golden sound
      Of old joy newly found
  And rapture as of penetrating peace
    The naked north-wind's cloudiest clime,
And give its darkness light of the old Sicilian time.


18.

He saw the brand that fired the towers of Troy
  Fade, and the darkness at Oenone's prayer
Close upon her that closed upon her boy,
  For all the curse of godhead that she bare;
And the Apollonian serpent gleam and toy
  With scathless maiden limbs and shuddering hair;
And his love smitten in their dawn of joy
  Leave Pan the pine-leaf of her change to wear;
      And one in flowery coils
      Caught as in fiery toils
  Smite Calydon with mourning unaware;
      And where her low turf shrine
      Showed Modesty divine
  The fairest mother's daughter far more fair
    Hide on her breast the heavenly shame
That kindled once with love should kindle Troy with flame.


19.

Nor less the light of story than of song
  With graver glories girt his godlike head,
Reverted alway from the temporal throng
  Of lives that live not toward the living dead.
The shadows and the splendours of their throng
  Made bright and dark about his board and bed
The lines of life and vision, sweet or strong
  With sound of lutes or trumpets blown, that led
      Forth of the ghostly gate
      Opening in spite of fate
  Shapes of majestic or tumultuous tread,
      Divine and direful things,
      These foul as priests or kings,
  Those fair as heaven or love or freedom, red
    With blood and green with palms and white
With raiment woven of deeds divine and words of light.


20.

The thunder-fire of Cromwell, and the ray
  That keeps the place of Phocion's name serene
And clears the cloud from Kosciusko's day,
  Alternate as dark hours with bright between,
Met in the heaven of his high thought, which lay
  For all stars open that all eyes had seen
Rise on the night or twilight of the way
  Where feet of human hopes and fears had been.
      Again the sovereign word
      On Milton's lips was heard
  Living: again the tender three days' queen
      Drew bright and gentle breath
      On the sharp edge of death:
  And, staged again to show of mortal scene,
    Tiberius, ere his name grew dire,
Wept, stainless yet of empire, tears of blood and fire.


21.

Most ardent and most awful and most fond,
  The fervour of his Apollonian eye
Yearned upon Hellas, yet enthralled in bond
  Of time whose years beheld her and past by
Silent and shameful, till she rose and donned
  The casque again of Pallas; for her cry
Forth of the past and future, depths beyond
  This where the present and its tyrants lie,
      As one great voice of twain
      For him had pealed again,
  Heard but of hearts high as her own was high,
      High as her own and his
      And pure as love's heart is,
  That lives though hope at once and memory die:
    And with her breath his clarion's blast
Was filled as cloud with fire or future souls with past.


22.

As a wave only obsequious to the wind
  Leaps to the lifting breeze that bids it leap,
Large-hearted, and its thickening mane be thinned
  By the strong god's breath moving on the deep
From utmost Atlas even to extremest Ind
  That shakes the plain where no men sow nor reap,
So, moved with wrath toward men that ruled and sinned
  And pity toward all tears he saw men weep,
      Arose to take man's part
      His loving lion heart,
  Kind as the sun's that has in charge to keep
      Earth and the seed thereof
      Safe in his lordly love,
  Strong as sheer truth and soft as very sleep;
    The mightiest heart since Milton's leapt,
The gentlest since the gentlest heart of Shakespeare slept.


23.

Like the wind's own on her divided sea
  His song arose on Corinth, and aloud
Recalled her Isthmian song and strife when she
  Was thronged with glories as with gods in crowd
And as the wind's own spirit her breath was free
  And as the heaven's own heart her soul was proud,
But freer and prouder stood no son than he
  Of all she bare before her heart was bowed;
      None higher than he who heard
      Medea's keen last word
  Transpierce her traitor, and like a rushing cloud
      That sundering shows a star
      Saw pass her thunderous car
  And a face whiter and deadlier than a shroud
    That lightened from it, and the brand
Of tender blood that falling seared his suppliant hand.


24.

More fair than all things born and slain of fate,
  More glorious than all births of days and nights,
He bade the spirit of man regenerate,
  Rekindling, rise and reassume the rights
That in high seasons of his old estate
  Clothed him and armed with majesties and mights
Heroic, when the times and hearts were great
  And in the depths of ages rose the heights
      Radiant of high deeds done
      And souls that matched the sun
  For splendour with the lightnings of their lights
      Whence even their uttered names
      Burn like the strong twin flames
  Of song that shakes a throne and steel that smites;
    As on Thermopylæ when shone
Leonidas, on Syracuse Timoleon.


25.

Or, sweeter than the breathless buds when spring
  With smiles and tears and kisses bids them breathe,
Fell with its music from his quiring string
  Fragrance of pine-leaves and odorous heath
Twined round the lute whereto he sighed to sing
  Of the oak that screened and showed its maid beneath,
Who seeing her bee crawl back with broken wing
  Faded, a fairer flower than all her wreath,
      And paler, though her oak
      Stood scathless of the stroke
  More sharp than edge of axe or wolfish teeth,
      That mixed with mortals dead
      Her own half heavenly head
  And life incorporate with a sylvan sheath,
    And left the wild rose and the dove
A secret place and sacred from all guests but Love.


26.

But in the sweet clear fields beyond the river
  Dividing pain from peace and man from shade
He saw the wings that there no longer quiver
  Sink of the hours whose parting footfalls fade
On ears which hear the rustling amaranth shiver
  With sweeter sound of wind than ever made
Music on earth: departing, they deliver
  The soul that shame or wrath or sorrow swayed;
      And round the king of men
      Clash the clear arms again,
  Clear of all soil and bright as laurel braid,
      That rang less high for joy
      Through the gates fallen of Troy
  Than here to hail the sacrificial maid,
    Iphigeneia, when the ford
Fast-flowing of sorrows brought her father and their lord.


27.

And in the clear gulf of the hollow sea
  He saw light glimmering through the grave green gloom
That hardly gave the sun's eye leave to see
  Cymodameia; but nor tower nor tomb,
No tower on earth, no tomb of waves may be,
  That may not sometime by diviner doom
Be plain and pervious to the poet; he
  Bids time stand back from him and fate make room
      For passage of his feet,
      Strong as their own are fleet,
  And yield the prey no years may reassume
      Through all their clamorous track,
      Nor night nor day win back
  Nor give to darkness what his eyes illume
    And his lips bless for ever: he
Knows what earth knows not, sings truth sung not of the sea.


28.

Before the sentence of a curule chair
  More sacred than the Roman, rose and stood
To take their several doom the imperial pair
  Diversely born of Venus, and in mood
Diverse as their one mother, and as fair,
  Though like two stars contrasted, and as good,
Though different as dark eyes from golden hair;
  One as that iron planet red like blood
      That bears among the stars
      Fierce witness of her Mars
  In bitter fire by her sweet light subdued;
      One, in the gentler skies
      Sweet as her amorous eyes:
  One proud of worlds and seas and darkness rude
    Composed and conquered; one content
With lightnings from loved eyes of lovers lightly sent.


29.

And where Alpheus and where Ladon ran
  Radiant, by many a rushy and rippling cove
More known to glance of god than wandering man,
  He sang the strife of strengths divine that strove,
Unequal, one with other, for a span,
  Who should be friends for ever in heaven above
And here on pastoral earth: Arcadian Pan,
  And the awless lord of kings and shepherds, Love:
      All the sweet strife and strange
      With fervid counterchange
  Till one fierce wail through many a glade and grove
      Rang, and its breath made shiver
      The reeds of many a river,
  And the warm airs waxed wintry that it clove,
    Keen-edged as ice-retempered brand;
Nor might god's hurt find healing save of godlike hand.


30.

As when the jarring gates of thunder ope
  Like earthquake felt in heaven, so dire a cry,
So fearful and so fierce--'Give the sword scope!'--
  Rang from a daughter's lips, darkening the sky
To the extreme azure of all its cloudless cope
  With starless horror: nor the God's own eye
Whose doom bade smite, whose ordinance bade hope,
  Might well endure to see the adulteress die,
      The husband-slayer fordone
      By swordstroke of her son,
  Unutterable, unimaginable on high,
      On earth abhorrent, fell
      Beyond all scourge of hell,
  Yet righteous as redemption: Love stood nigh,
    Mute, sister-like, and closer clung
Than all fierce forms of threatening coil and maddening tongue.


31.

All these things heard and seen and sung of old,
  He heard and saw and sang them. Once again
Might foot of man tread, eye of man behold
  Things unbeholden save of ancient men,
Ways save by gods untrodden. In his hold
  The staff that stayed through some Ætnean glen
The steps of the most highest, most awful-souled
  And mightiest-mouthed of singers, even as then
      Became a prophet's rod,
      A lyre on fire of God,
  Being still the staff of exile: yea, as when
      The voice poured forth on us
      Was even of Æschylus,
  And his one word great as the crying of ten,
    Crying in men's ears of wrath toward wrong,
Of love toward right immortal, sanctified with song.


32.

Him too whom none save one before him ever
  Beheld, nor since hath man again beholden,
Whom Dante seeing him saw not, nor the giver
  Of all gifts back to man by time withholden,
Shakespeare--him too, whom sea-like ages sever,
  As waves divide men's eyes from lights upholden
To landward, from our songs that find him never,
  Seeking, though memory fire and hope embolden--
      Him too this one song found,
      And raised at its sole sound
  Up from the dust of darkling dreams and olden
      Legends forlorn of breath,
      Up from the deeps of death,
  Ulysses: him whose name turns all songs golden,
    The wise divine strong soul, whom fate
Could make no less than change and chance beheld him great.


33.

Nor stands the seer who raised him less august
  Before us, nor in judgment frail and rathe,
Less constant or less loving or less just,
  But fruitful-ripe and full of tender faith,
Holding all high and gentle names in trust
  Of time for honour; so his quickening breath
Called from the darkness of their martyred dust
  Our sweet Saints Alice and Elizabeth,
      Revived and reinspired
      With speech from heavenward fired
  By love to say what Love the Archangel saith
      Only, nor may such word
      Save by such ears be heard
  As hear the tongues of angels after death
    Descending on them like a dove
Has taken all earthly sense of thought away but love.


34.

All sweet, all sacred, all heroic things,
  All generous names and loyal, and all wise,
With all his heart in all its wayfarings
  He sought, and worshipped, seeing them with his eyes
In very present glory, clothed with wings
  Of words and deeds and dreams immortal, rise
Visible more than living slaves and kings,
  Audible more than actual vows and lies:
      These, with scorn's fieriest rod,
      These and the Lord their God,
  The Lord their likeness, tyrant of the skies
      As they Lord Gods of earth,
      These with a rage of mirth
  He mocked and scourged and spat on, in such wise
    That none might stand before his rod,
And these being slain the Spirit alone be lord or God.


35.

For of all souls for all time glorious none
  Loved Freedom better, of all who have loved her best,
Than he who wrote that scripture of the sun
  Writ as with fire and light on heaven's own crest,
Of all words heard on earth the noblest one
  That ever spake for souls and left them blest:
GLADLY WE SHOULD REST EVER, HAD WE WON
  FREEDOM: WE HAVE LOST, AND VERY GLADLY REST.
      O poet hero, lord
      And father, we record
  Deep in the burning tablets of the breast
      Thankfully those divine
      And living words of thine
  For faith and comfort in our hearts imprest
    With strokes engraven past hurt of years
And lines inured with fire of immemorial tears.


36.

But who being less than thou shall sing of thee
  Words worthy of more than pity or less than scorn?
Who sing the golden garland woven of three,
  Thy daughters, Graces mightier than the morn,
More godlike than the graven gods men see
  Made all but all immortal, human born
And heavenly natured? With the first came He,
  Led by the living hand, who left forlorn
      Life by his death, and time
      More by his life sublime
  Than by the lives of all whom all men mourn,
      And even for mourning praise
      Heaven, as for all those days
  These dead men's lives clothed round with glories worn
    By memory till all time lie dead,
And higher than all behold the bay round Shakespeare's head.


37.

Then, fairer than the fairest Grace of ours,
  Came girt with Grecian gold the second Grace,
And verier daughter of his most perfect hours
  Than any of latter time or alien place
Named, or with hair inwoven of English flowers
  Only, nor wearing on her statelier face
The lordlier light of Athens. All the Powers
  That graced and guarded round that holiest race,
      That heavenliest and most high
      Time hath seen live and die,
  Poured all their power upon him to retrace
      The erased immortal roll
      Of Love's most sovereign scroll
  And Wisdom's warm from Freedom's wide embrace,
    The scroll that on Aspasia's knees
Laid once made manifest the Olympian Pericles.


38.

Clothed on with tenderest weft of Tuscan air,
  Came laughing like Etrurian spring the third,
With green Valdelsa's hill-flowers in her hair
  Deep-drenched with May-dews, in her voice the bird
Whose voice hath night and morning in it; fair
  As the ambient gold of wall-flowers that engird
The walls engirdling with a circling stair
  My sweet San Gimignano: nor a word
      Fell from her flowerlike mouth
      Not sweet with all the south;
  As though the dust shrined in Certaldo stirred
      And spake, as o'er it shone
      That bright Pentameron,
  And his own vines again and chestnuts heard
    Boccaccio: nor swift Elsa's chime
Mixed not her golden babble with Petrarca's rhyme.


39.

No lovelier laughed the garden which receives
  Yet, and yet hides not from our following eyes
With soft rose-laurels and low strawberry-leaves,
  Ternissa, sweet as April-coloured skies,
Bowed like a flowering reed when May's wind heaves
  The reed-bed that the stream kisses and sighs,
In love that shrinks and murmurs and believes
  What yet the wisest of the starriest wise
      Whom Greece might ever hear
      Speaks in the gentlest ear
  That ever heard love's lips philosophize
      With such deep-reasoning words
      As blossoms use and birds,
  Nor heeds Leontion lingering till they rise
    Far off, in no wise over far,
Beneath a heaven all amorous of its first-born star.


40.

What sound, what storm and splendour of what fire,
  Darkening the light of heaven, lightening the night,
Rings, rages, flashes round what ravening pyre
  That makes time's face pale with its reflex light
And leaves on earth, who seeing might scarce respire,
  A shadow of red remembrance? Right nor might
Alternating wore ever shapes more dire
  Nor manifest in all men's awful sight
      In form and face that wore
      Heaven's light and likeness more
  Than these, or held suspense men's hearts at height
      More fearful, since man first
      Slaked with man's blood his thirst,
  Than when Rome clashed with Hannibal in fight,
    Till tower on ruining tower was hurled
Where Scipio stood, and Carthage was not in the world.


41.

Nor lacked there power of purpose in his hand
  Who carved their several praise in words of gold
To bare the brows of conquerors and to brand,
  Made shelterless of laurels bought and sold
For price of blood or incense, dust or sand,
  Triumph or terror. He that sought of old
His father Ammon in a stranger's land,
  And shrank before the serpentining fold,
      Stood in our seer's wide eye
      No higher than man most high,
  And lowest in heart when highest in hope to hold
      Fast as a scripture furled
      The scroll of all the world
  Sealed with his signet: nor the blind and bold
    First thief of empire, round whose head
Swarmed carrion flies for bees, on flesh for violets fed.[1]


42.

As fire that kisses, killing with a kiss,
  He saw the light of death, riotous and red,
Flame round the bent brows of Semiramis
  Re-risen, and mightier, from the Assyrian dead,
Kindling, as dawn a frost-bound precipice,
  The steely snows of Russia, for the tread
Of feet that felt before them crawl and hiss
  The snaky lines of blood violently shed.
      Like living creeping things
      That writhe but have no stings
  To scare adulterers from the imperial bed
      Bowed with its load of lust,
      Or chill the ravenous gusts
  That made her body a fire from heel to head;
    Or change her high bright spirit and clear,
For all its mortal stains, from taint of fraud or fear.


43.

As light that blesses, hallowing with a look;
  He saw the godhead in Vittoria's face
Shine soft on Buonarroti's, till he took,
  Albeit himself God, a more godlike grace,
A strength more heavenly to confront and brook
  All ill things coiled about his worldly race,
From the bright scripture of that present book
  Wherein his tired grand eyes got power to trace
      Comfort more sweet than youth,
      And hope whose child was truth,
  And love that brought forth sorrow for a space,
      Only that she might bear
      Joy: these things, written there,
  Made even his soul's high heaven a heavenlier place,
    Perused with eyes whose glory and glow
Had in their fires the spirit of Michael Angelo.


44.

With balms and dews of blessing he consoled
  The fair fame wounded by the black priest's fang,
Giovanna's, and washed off her blithe and bold
  Boy-bridegroom's blood, that seemed so long to hang
On her fair hand, even till the stain of old
  Was cleansed with healing song, that after sang
Sharp truth by sweetest singers' lips untold
  Of pale Beatrice, though her death-note rang
      From other strings divine
      Ere his rekindling line
  With yet more piteous and intolerant pang
      Pierced all men's hearts anew
      That heard her passion through
  Till fierce from throes of fiery pity sprang
    Wrath, armed for chase of monstrous beasts,
Strong to lay waste the kingdom of the seed of priests.


45.

He knew the high-souled humbleness, the mirth
  And majesty of meanest men born free,
That made with Luther's or with Hofer's birth
  The whole world worthier of the sun to see:
The wealth of spirit among the snows, the dearth
  Wherein souls festered by the servile sea
That saw the lowest of even crowned heads on earth
  Thronged round with worship in Parthenope.
      His hand bade Justice guide
      Her child Tyrannicide,
  Light winged by fire that brings the dawn to be;
      And pierced with Tyrrel's dart
      Again the riotous heart
  That mocked at mercy's tongue and manhood's knee:
    And oped the cell where kinglike death
Hung o'er her brows discrowned who bare Elizabeth.


46.

Toward Spenser or toward Bacon proud or kind
  He bared the heart of Essex, twain and one,
For the base heart that soiled the starry mind
  Stern, for the father in his child undone
Soft as his own toward children, stamped and signed
  With their sweet image visibly set on
As by God's hand, clear as his own designed
  The likeness radiant out of ages gone
      That none may now destroy
      Of that high Roman boy
  Whom Julius and Cleopatra saw their son
      True-born of sovereign seed,
      Foredoomed even thence to bleed,
  The stately grace of bright Cæsarion,
    The head unbent, the heart unbowed,
That not the shadow of death could make less clear and proud.


47.

With gracious gods he communed, honouring thus
  At once by service and similitude,
Service devout and worship emulous
  Of the same golden Muses once they wooed,
The names and shades adored of all of us,
  The nurslings of the brave world's earlier brood,
Grown gods for us themselves: Theocritus
  First, and more dear Catullus, names bedewed
      With blessings bright like tears
      From the old memorial years,
  And loves and lovely laughters, every mood
      Sweet as the drops that fell
      Of their own oenomel
  From living lips to cheer the multitude
    That feeds on words divine, and grows
More worthy, seeing their world reblossom like a rose.


48.

Peace, the soft seal of long life's closing story,
  The silent music that no strange note jars,
Crowned not with gentler hand the years that glory
  Crowned, but could hide not all the spiritual scars
Time writes on the inward strengths of warriors hoary
  With much long warfare, and with gradual bars
Blindly pent in: but these, being transitory,
  Broke, and the power came back that passion mars:
      And at the lovely last
      Above all anguish past
  Before his own the sightless eyes like stars
      Arose that watched arise
      Like stars in other skies
  Above the strife of ships and hurtling cars
    The Dioscurian songs divine
That lighten all the world with lightning of their line.


49.

He sang the last of Homer, having sung
  The last of his Ulysses. Bright and wide
For him time's dark strait ways, like clouds that clung
  About the day-star, doubtful to divide,
Waxed in his spiritual eyeshot, and his tongue
  Spake as his soul bore witness, that descried,
Like those twin towering lights in darkness hung,
  Homer, and grey Laertes at his side
      Kingly as kings are none
      Beneath a later sun,
  And the sweet maiden ministering in pride
      To sovereign and to sage
      In their more sweet old age:
  These things he sang, himself as old, and died.
    And if death be not, if life be,
As Homer and as Milton are in heaven is he.


50.

Poet whose large-eyed loyalty of love
  Was pure toward all high poets, all their kind
And all bright words and all sweet works thereof;
  Strong like the sun, and like the sunlight kind;
Heart that no fear but every grief might move
  Wherewith men's hearts were bound of powers that bind;
The purest soul that ever proof could prove
  From taint of tortuous or of envious mind;
      Whose eyes elate and clear
      Nor shame nor ever fear
  But only pity or glorious wrath could blind;
      Name set for love apart,
      Held lifelong in my heart,
  Face like a father's toward my face inclined;
    No gilts like thine are mine to give,
Who by thine own words only bid thee hail, and live.


[1] Thy lifelong works, Napoleon, who shall write?
    Time, in his children's blood who takes delight.

                            _From the Greek of Landor._


NOTES.

6. See note to the Imaginary Conversation of Leofric and Godiva for the
exquisite first verses extant from the hand of Landor.

10. The Poems of Walter Savage Landor: 1795. Moral Epistle, respectfully
dedicated to Earl Stanhope: 1795. Gebir.

13. Count Julian: Ines de Castro: Ippolito di Este.

14, 15. Poems 'on the Dead.'

16. Imaginary Conversations: Lord Brooke and Sir Philip Sidney.

17, 18. Idyllia Nova Quinque Heroum atque Heroidum (1815): Corythus;
Dryope; Pan et Pitys; Coresus et Callirrhoe; Helena ad Pudoris Aram.

19, 20. Imaginary Conversations: Oliver Cromwell and Walter Noble;
Æschines and Phocion; Kosciusko and Poniatowski; Milton and Marvell;
Roger Ascham and Lady Jane Grey; Tiberius and Vipsania.

21, 22, 23. Hellenics: To Corinth.

24. Hellenics: Regeneration.

25. The Hamadryad; Acon and Rhodope.

26. The Shades of Agamemnon and Iphigeneia.

27. Enallos and Cymodameia.

28. The Children of Venus.

29. Cupid and Pan.

30. The Death of Clytemnestra; The Madness of Orestes; The Prayer of
Orestes.

32. The Last of Ulysses.

33. Imaginary Conversations. Lady Lisle and Elizabeth Gaunt.

35. _Pro monumento super milites regio jussu interemptos._

36. The Citation and Examination of William Shakespeare.

37. Pericles and Aspasia.

38. The Pentameron.

39. Imaginary Conversations: Epicurus, Leontion, and Ternissa.

40. Marcellus and Hannibal: P. Scipio Æmilianus, Polybius, and Panætius.

41. Alexander and Priest of Ammon: Bonaparte and the President of the
Senate.

42. The Empress Catherine and Princess Dashkoff.

43. Vittoria Colonna and Michel-Angelo Buonarroti.

44. Andrea of Hungary, Giovanna of Naples, Fra Rupert; a Trilogy: Five
Scenes (Beatrice Cenci).

45. Luther's Parents: The Death of Hofer: (_Imaginary Conversations_)
Andrew Hofer, Count Metternich, and the Emperor Francis; Judge Wolfgang
and Henry of Melchthal: The Coronation. Tyrannicide (_The Last Fruit off
an Old Tree_): Walter Tyrrel and William Rufus: Henry VIII. and Anne
Boleyn.

46. Essex and Spenser (_Imaginary Conversations_): Essex and Bacon:
Antony and Octavius (_Scenes for the Study_).

47. Critical Essays on Theocritus and Catullus.

48, 49. Heroic Idyls; Homer, Laertes, and Agatha.

     'J'en passe, et des meilleurs.' But who can enumerate all or
     half our obligations to the illimitable and inexhaustible
     genius of the great man whose life and whose labour lasted
     even from the generation of our fathers' fathers to our own?
     Hardly any reader can feel, I think, so deeply as I feel the
     inadequacy of my poor praise and too imperfect gratitude to
     the majestic subject of their attempted expression; but
     'such as I had have I given him.'




GRAND CHORUS OF BIRDS

FROM

ARISTOPHANES

_Attempted in English verse after the original metre._


I was allured into the audacity of this experiment by consideration of a
fact which hitherto does not seem to have been taken into consideration
by any translator of the half divine humourist in whose incomparable
genius the highest qualities of Rabelais were fused and harmonized with
the supremest gifts of Shelley: namely, that his marvellous metrical
invention of the anapæstic heptameter was almost exactly reproducible in
a language to which all variations and combinations of anapæstic,
iambic, or trochaic metre are as natural and pliable as all dactylic and
spondaic forms of verse are unnatural and abhorrent. As it happens, this
highest central interlude of a most adorable masterpiece is as easy to
detach from its dramatic setting, and even from its lyrical context, as
it was easy to give line for line of it in English. In two metrical
points only does my version vary from the verbal pattern of the
original. I have of course added rhymes, and double rhymes, as necessary
makeweights for the imperfection of an otherwise inadequate language;
and equally of course I have not attempted the impossible and
undesirable task of reproducing the rare exceptional effect of a line
overcharged on purpose with a preponderance of heavy-footed spondees:
and this for the obvious reason that even if such a line--which I
doubt--could be exactly represented, foot by foot and pause for pause,
in English, this English line would no more be a verse in any proper
sense of the word than is the line I am writing at this moment. And my
main intention, or at least my main desire, in the undertaking of this
brief adventure, was to renew as far as possible for English ears the
music of this resonant and triumphant metre, which goes ringing at full
gallop as of horses who

                        'dance as 'twere to the music
    Their own hoofs make.'

I would not seem over curious in search of an apt or inapt quotation:
but nothing can be fitter than a verse of Shakespeare's to praise at
once and to describe the most typical verse of Aristophanes.




_THE BIRDS._

(685-723.)


Come on then, ye dwellers by nature in darkness, and like to the leaves'
          generations,
That are little of might, that are moulded of mire, unenduring and
          shadowlike nations,
Poor plumeless ephemerals, comfortless mortals, as visions of creatures
          fast fleeing,
Lift up your mind unto us that are deathless, and dateless the date of
          our being:
Us, children of heaven, us, ageless for aye, us, all of whose thoughts
          are eternal;
That ye may from henceforth, having heard of us all things aright as to
          matters supernal,
Of the being of birds and beginning of gods, and of streams, and the
          dark beyond reaching,
Truthfully knowing aright, in my name bid Prodicus pack with his preaching.

  It was Chaos and Night at the first, and the blackness of darkness, and
          hell's broad border,
Earth was not, nor air, neither heaven; when in depths of the womb of the
          dark without order
First thing first-born of the black-plumed Night was a wind-egg hatched
          in her bosom,
Whence timely with seasons revolving again sweet Love burst out as a
          blossom,
Gold wings glittering forth of his back, like whirlwinds gustily turning.
He, after his wedlock with Chaos, whose wings are of darkness, in hell
          broad-burning,
For his nestlings begat him the race of us first, and upraised us to
          light new-lighted.
And before this was not the race of the gods, until all things by Love
          were united;
And of kind united with kind in communion of nature the sky and the sea
          are
Brought forth, and the earth, and the race of the gods everlasting and
          blest. So that we are
Far away the most ancient of all things blest. And that we are of Love's
          generation
There are manifest manifold signs. We have wings, and with us have the
          Loves habitation;
And manifold fair young folk that forswore love once, ere the bloom of
          them ended,
Have the men that pursued and desired them subdued, by the help of us
          only befriended,
With such baits as a quail, a flamingo, a goose, or a cock's comb staring
          and splendid.

  All best good things that befall men come from us birds, as is plain to
          all reason:
For first we proclaim and make known to them spring, and the winter and
          autumn in season;
Bid sow, when the crane starts clanging for Afric, in shrill-voiced
          emigrant number,
And calls to the pilot to hang up his rudder again for the season, and
          slumber;
And then weave a cloak for Orestes the thief, lest he strip men of theirs
          if it freezes.
And again thereafter the kite reappearing announces a change in the
          breezes,
And that here is the season for shearing your sheep of their spring wool.
          Then does the swallow
Give you notice to sell your greatcoat, and provide something light for
          the heat that's to follow.
Thus are we as Ammon or Delphi unto you, Dodona, nay, Phoebus Apollo.
For, as first ye come all to get auguries of birds, even such is in all
          things your carriage,
Be the matter a matter of trade, or of earning your bread, or of any
          one's marriage.
And all things ye lay to the charge of a bird that belong to discerning
          prediction:
Winged fame is a bird, as you reckon: you sneeze, and the sign's as a
          bird for conviction:
All tokens are 'birds' with you--sounds too, and lackeys, and donkeys.
          Then must it not follow
That we ARE to you all as the manifest godhead that speaks in prophetic
          Apollo?

_October 19, 1880._




_OFF SHORE._


              When the might of the summer
                Is most on the sea;
              When the days overcome her
                With joy but to be,
With rapture of royal enchantment, and sorcery that sets her not free,

              But for hours upon hours
                As a thrall she remains
              Spell-bound as with flowers
                And content in their chains,
And her loud steeds fret not, and lift not a lock of their deep white
          manes;

              Then only, far under
                In the depths of her hold,
              Some gleam of its wonder
                Man's eye may behold,
Its wild-weed forests of crimson and russet and olive and gold.

              Still deeper and dimmer
                And goodlier they glow
              For the eyes of the swimmer
                Who scans them below
As he crosses the zone of their flowerage that knows not of sunshine and
          snow.

              Soft blossomless frondage
                And foliage that gleams
              As to prisoners in bondage
                The light of their dreams,
The desire of a dawn unbeholden, with hope on the wings of its beams.

              Not as prisoners entombed
                Waxen haggard and wizen,
              But consoled and illumed
                In the depths of their prison
With delight of the light everlasting and vision of dawn on them risen,

              From the banks and the beds
                Of the waters divine
              They lift up their heads
                And the flowers of them shine
Through the splendour of darkness that clothes them of water that glimmers
          like wine.

              Bright bank over bank
                Making glorious the gloom,
              Soft rank upon rank,
                Strange bloom after bloom,
They kindle the liquid low twilight, the dusk of the dim sea's womb.

              Through the subtle and tangible
                Gloom without form,
              Their branches, infrangible
                Ever of storm
Spread softer their sprays than the shoots of the woodland when April is
          warm.

              As the flight of the thunder, full
                Charged with its word,
              Dividing the wonderful
                Depths like a bird,
Speaks wrath and delight to the heart of the night that exults to have
          heard,

              So swiftly, though soundless
                In silence's ear,
              Light, winged from the boundless
                Blue depths full of cheer,
Speaks joy to the heart of the waters that part not before him, but hear.

              Light, perfect and visible
                Godhead of God,
              God indivisible,
                Lifts but his rod,
And the shadows are scattered in sunder, and darkness is light at his nod.

              At the touch of his wand,
                At the nod of his head
              From the spaces beyond
                Where the dawn hath her bed,
Earth, water, and air are transfigured, and rise as one risen from the
          dead.

              He puts forth his hand,
                And the mountains are thrilled
              To the heart as they stand
                In his presence, fulfilled
With his glory that utters his grace upon earth, and her sorrows are
          stilled.

              The moan of her travail
                That groans for the light
              Till dayspring unravel
                The weft of the night,
At the sound of the strings of the music of morning, falls dumb with
          delight.

              He gives forth his word,
                And the word that he saith,
              Ere well it be heard,
                Strikes darkness to death;
For the thought of his heart is the sunrise, and dawn as the sound of his
          breath.

              And the strength of its pulses
                That passion makes proud
              Confounds and convulses
                The depths of the cloud
Of the darkness that heaven was engirt with, divided and rent as a shroud,

              As the veil of the shrine
                Of the temple of old
              When darkness divine
                Over noonday was rolled;
So the heart of the night by the pulse of the light is convulsed and
          controlled.

              And the sea's heart, groaning
                For glories withdrawn,
              And the waves' mouths, moaning
                All night for the dawn,
Are uplift as the hearts and the mouths of the singers on leaside and lawn.

              And the sound of the quiring
                Of all these as one,
              Desired and desiring
                Till dawn's will be done,
Fills full with delight of them heaven till it burns as the heart of the
          sun.

              Till the waves too inherit
                And waters take part
              In the sense of the spirit
                That breathes from his heart,
And are kindled with music as fire when the lips of the morning part,

              With music unheard
                In the light of her lips,
              In the life-giving word
                Of the dewfall that drips
On the grasses of earth, and the wind that enkindles the wings of the
          ships.

              White glories of wings
                As of seafaring birds
              That flock from the springs
                Of the sunrise in herds
With the wind for a herdsman, and hasten or halt at the change of his
          words.

              As the watchword's change
                When the wind's note shifts,
              And the skies grow strange,
                And the white squall drifts
Up sharp from the sea-line, vexing the sea till the low cloud lifts.

              At the charge of his word
                Bidding pause, bidding haste,
              When the ranks are stirred
                And the lines displaced,
They scatter as wild swans parting adrift on the wan green waste.

              At the hush of his word
                In a pause of his breath
              When the waters have heard
                His will that he saith,
They stand as a flock penned close in its fold for division of death.

              As a flock by division
                Of death to be thinned,
              As the shades in a vision
                Of spirits that sinned;
So glimmer their shrouds and their sheetings as clouds on the stream of the
          wind.

              But the sun stands fast,
                And the sea burns bright,
              And the flight of them past
                Is no more than the flight
Of the snow-soft swarm of serene wings poised and afloat in the light.

              Like flowers upon flowers
                In a festival way
              When hours after hours
                Shed grace on the day,
White blossomlike butterflies hover and gleam through the snows of the
          spray.

              Like snow-coloured petals
                Of blossoms that flee
              From storm that unsettles
                The flower as the tree
They flutter, a legion of flowers on the wing, through the field of the
          sea.

              Through the furrowless field
                Where the foam-blossoms blow
              And the secrets are sealed
                Of their harvest below
They float in the path of the sunbeams, as flakes or as blossoms of snow.

              Till the sea's ways darken,
                And the God, withdrawn,
              Give ear not or hearken
                If prayer on him fawn,
And the sun's self seem but a shadow, the noon as a ghost of the dawn.

              No shadow, but rather
                God, father of song,
              Shew grace to me, Father
                God, loved of me long,
That I lose not the light of thy face, that my trust in thee work me not
          wrong.

              While yet I make forward
                With face toward thee
              Not turned yet in shoreward,
                Be thine upon me;
Be thy light on my forehead or ever I turn it again from the sea.

              As a kiss on my brow
                Be the light of thy grace,
              Be thy glance on me now
                From the pride of thy place:
As the sign of a sire to a son be the light on my face of thy face.

              Thou wast father of olden
                Times hailed and adored,
              And the sense of thy golden
                Great harp's monochord
Was the joy in the soul of the singers that hailed thee for master and
          lord.

              Fair father of all
                In thy ways that have trod,
              That have risen at thy call,
                That have thrilled at thy nod,
Arise, shine, lighten upon me, O sun that we see to be God.

              As my soul has been dutiful
                Only to thee,
              O God most beautiful,
                Lighten thou me,
As I swim through the dim long rollers, with eyelids uplift from the sea.

              Be praised and adored of us
                All in accord,
              Father and lord of us
                Alway adored,
The slayer and the stayer and the harper, the light of us all and our lord.

              At the sound of thy lyre,
                At the touch of thy rod,
              Air quickens to fire
                By the foot of thee trod,
The saviour and healer and singer, the living and visible God.

              The years are before thee
                As shadows of thee,
              As men that adore thee,
                As cloudlets that flee:
But thou art the God, and thy kingdom is heaven, and thy shrine is the sea.




_AFTER NINE YEARS._

TO JOSEPH MAZZINI.

_Primâ dicte mihi, summâ dicende Camenâ._


1.

The shadows fallen of years are nine
Since heaven grew seven times more divine
With thy soul entering, and the dearth
Of souls on earth
Grew sevenfold sadder, wanting One
Whose light of life, quenched here and done,
Burns there eternal as the sun.


2.

Beyond all word, beyond all deed,
Beyond all thought beloved, what need
Has death or love that speech should be,
Hast thou of me?
I had no word, no prayer, no cry,
To praise or hail or mourn thee by,
As when thou too wast man as I.


3.

Nay, never, nor as any born
Save one whose name priests turn to scorn,
Who haply, though we know not now,
Was man as thou,
A wanderer branded with men's blame,
Loved past man's utterance: yea, the same,
Perchance, and as his name thy name.


4.

Thou wast as very Christ--not he
Degraded into Deity,
And priest-polluted by such prayer
As poisons air,
Tongue-worship of the tongue that slays,
False faith and parricidal praise:
But the man crowned with suffering days.


5.

God only, being of all mankind
Most manlike, of most equal mind
And heart most perfect, more than can
Be heart of man
Once in ten ages, born to be
As haply Christ was, and as we
Knew surely, seeing, and worshipped thee.


6.

To know thee--this at least was ours,
God, clothed upon with human hours,
O face beloved, O spirit adored,
Saviour and lord!
That wast not only for thine own
Redeemer--not of these alone
But all to whom thy word was known.


7.

Ten years have wrought their will with me
Since last my words took wing for thee
Who then wast even as now above
Me, and my love.
As then thou knewest not scorn, so now
With that beloved benignant brow
Take these of him whose light wast thou.




_FOR A PORTRAIT OF FELICE ORSINI._


Steadfast as sorrow, fiery sad, and sweet
  With underthoughts of love and faith, more strong
  Than doubt and hate and all ill thoughts which throng,
Haply, round hope's or fear's world-wandering feet
That find no rest from wandering till they meet
  Death, bearing palms in hand and crowns of song;
  His face, who thought to vanquish wrong with wrong,
Erring, and make rage and redemption meet,
Havoc and freedom; weaving in one weft
Good with his right hand, evil with his left;
  But all a hero lived and erred and died;
Looked thus upon the living world he left
  So bravely that with pity less than pride
  Men hail him Patriot and Tyrannicide.




_EVENING ON THE BROADS._


Over two shadowless waters, adrift as a pinnace in peril,
  Hangs as in heavy suspense, charged with irresolute light,
Softly the soul of the sunset upholden awhile on the sterile
  Waves and wastes of the land, half repossessed by the night.
Inland glimmer the shallows asleep and afar in the breathless
  Twilight: yonder the depths darken afar and asleep.
Slowly the semblance of death out of heaven descends on the deathless
  Waters: hardly the light lives on the face of the deep--
Hardly, but here for awhile. All over the grey soft shallow
  Hover the colours and clouds of the twilight, void of a star.
As a bird unfledged is the broad-winged night, whose winglets are callow
  Yet, but soon with their plumes will she cover her brood from afar,
Cover the brood of her worlds that cumber the skies with their blossom
  Thick as the darkness of leaf-shadowed spring is encumbered with flowers.
World upon world is enwound in the bountiful girth of her bosom,
  Warm and lustrous with life lovely to look on as ours.
Still is the sunset adrift as a spirit in doubt that dissembles
  Still with itself, being sick of division and dimmed by dismay--
Nay, not so; but with love and delight beyond passion it trembles,
  Fearful and fain of the night, lovely with love of the day:
Fain and fearful of rest that is like unto death, and begotten
  Out of the womb of the tomb, born of the seed of the grave:
Lovely with shadows of loves that are only not wholly forgotten,
  Only not wholly suppressed by the dark as a wreck by the wave.
Still there linger the loves of the morning and noon, in a vision
  Blindly beheld, but in vain: ghosts that are tired, and would rest.
But the glories beloved of the night rise all too dense for division,
  Deep in the depth of her breast sheltered as doves in a nest.
Fainter the beams of the loves of the daylight season enkindled
  Wane, and the memories of hours that were fair with the love of them
          fade:
Loftier, aloft of the lights of the sunset stricken and dwindled,
  Gather the signs of the love at the heart of the night new-made.
New-made night, new-born of the sunset, immeasurable, endless,
  Opens the secret of love hid from of old in her heart,
In the deep sweet heart full-charged with faultless love of the friendless
  Spirits of men that are eased when the wheels of the sun depart.
Still is the sunset afloat as a ship on the waters upholden
  Full-sailed, wide-winged, poised softly for ever asway--
Nay, not so, but at least for a little, awhile at the golden
  Limit of arching air fain for an hour to delay.
Here on the bar of the sand-bank, steep yet aslope to the gleaming
  Waste of the water without, waste of the water within,
Lights overhead and lights underneath seem doubtfully dreaming
  Whether the day be done, whether the night may begin.
Far and afar and farther again they falter and hover,
  Warm on the water and deep in the sky and pale on the cloud:
Colder again and slowly remoter, afraid to recover
  Breath, yet fain to revive, as it seems, from the skirt of the shroud.
Faintly the heartbeats shorten and pause of the light in the westward
  Heaven, as eastward quicken the paces of star upon star
Hurried and eager of life as a child that strains to the breast-ward
  Eagerly, yearning forth of the deeps where the ways of them are,
Glad of the glory of the gift of their life and the wealth of its wonder,
  Fain of the night and the sea and the sweet wan face of the earth.
Over them air grows deeper, intense with delight in them: under
  Things are thrilled in their sleep as with sense of a sure new birth.
But here by the sand-bank watching, with eyes on the sea-line, stranger
  Grows to me also the weight of the sea-ridge gazed on of me,
Heavily heaped up, changefully changeless, void though of danger
  Void not of menace, but full of the might of the dense dull sea.
Like as the wave is before me, behind is the bank deep-drifted;
  Yellow and thick as the bank is behind me in front is the wave.
As the wall of a prison imprisoning the mere is the girth of it lifted:
  But the rampire of water in front is erect as the wall of a grave.
And the crests of it crumble and topple and change, but the wall is not
          broken:
  Standing still dry-shod, I see it as higher than my head,
Moving inland alway again, reared up as in token
  Still of impending wrath still in the foam of it shed.
And even in the pauses between them, dividing the rollers in sunder,
  High overhead seems ever the sea-line fixed as a mark,
And the shore where I stand as a valley beholden of hills whence thunder
  Cloud and torrent and storm, darkening the depths of the dark.
Up to the sea, not upon it or over it, upward from under
  Seems he to gaze, whose eyes yearn after it here from the shore:
A wall of turbid water, aslope to the wide sky's wonder
  Of colour and cloud, it climbs, or spreads as a slanted floor.
And the large lights change on the face of the mere like things that were
          living,
  Winged and wonderful, beams like as birds are that pass and are free:
But the light is dense as darkness, a gift withheld in the giving,
  That lies as dead on the fierce dull face of the landward sea.
Stained and stifled and soiled, made earthier than earth is and duller,
  Grimly she puts back light as rejected, a thing put away:
No transparent rapture, a molten music of colour;
  No translucent love taken and given of the day.
Fettered and marred and begrimed is the light's live self on her falling,
  As the light of a man's life lighted the fume of a dungeon mars:
Only she knows of the wind, when her wrath gives ear to him calling;
  The delight of the light she knows not, nor answers the sun or the stars.
Love she hath none to return for the luminous love of their giving:
  None to reflect from the bitter and shallow response of her heart
Yearly she feeds on her dead, yet herself seems dead and not living,
  Or confused as a soul heavy-laden with trouble that will not depart.
In the sound of her speech to the darkness the moan of her evil remorse is,
  Haply, for strong ships gnawed by the dog-toothed sea-bank's fang
And trampled to death by the rage of the feet of her foam-lipped horses
  Whose manes are yellow as plague, and as ensigns of pestilence hang,
That wave in the foul faint air of the breath of a death-stricken city;
  So menacing heaves she the manes of her rollers knotted with sand,
Discoloured, opaque, suspended in sign as of strength without pity,
  That shake with flameless thunder the low long length of the strand.
Here, far off in the farther extreme of the shore as it lengthens
  Northward, lonely for miles, ere ever a village begin,
On the lapsing land that recedes as the growth of the strong sea
          strengthens
  Shoreward, thrusting further and further its outworks in,
Here in Shakespeare's vision, a flower of her kin forsaken,
  Lay in her golden raiment alone on the wild wave's edge,
Surely by no shore else, but here on the bank storm-shaken,
  Perdita, bright as a dew-drop engilt of the sun on the sedge.
Here on a shore unbeheld of his eyes in a dream he beheld her
  Outcast, fair as a fairy, the child of a far-off king:
And over the babe-flower gently the head of a pastoral elder
  Bowed, compassionate, hoar as the hawthorn-blossom in spring,
And kind as harvest in autumn: a shelter of shade on the lonely
  Shelterless unknown shore scourged of implacable waves:
Here, where the wind walks royal, alone in his kingdom, and only
  Sounds to the sedges a wail as of triumph that conquers and craves.
All these waters and wastes are his empire of old, and awaken
  From barren and stagnant slumber at only the sound of his breath:
Yet the hunger is eased not that aches in his heart, nor the goal overtaken
  That his wide wings yearn for and labour as hearts that yearn after
          death.
All the solitude sighs and expects with a blind expectation
  Somewhat unknown of its own sad heart, grown heart-sick of strife:
Till sometime its wild heart maddens, and moans, and the vast ululation
  Takes wing with the clouds on the waters, and wails to be quit of its
          life.
For the spirit and soul of the waste is the wind, and his wings with their
          waving
  Darken and lighten the darkness and light of it thickened or thinned;
But the heart that impels them is even as a conqueror's insatiably craving
  That victory can fill not, as power cannot satiate the want of the wind.
All these moorlands and marshes are full of his might, and oppose not
  Aught of defence nor of barrier, of forest or precipice piled:
But the will of the wind works ever as his that desires what he knows not,
  And the wail of his want unfulfilled is as one making moan for her child.
And the cry of his triumph is even as the crying of hunger that maddens
  The heart of a strong man aching in vain as the wind's heart aches
And the sadness itself of the land for its infinite solitude saddens
  More for the sound than the silence athirst for the sound that slakes.
And the sunset at last and the twilight are dead: and the darkness is
          breathless
  With fear of the wind's breath rising that seems and seems not to sleep:
But a sense of the sound of it alway, a spirit unsleeping and deathless,
  Ghost or God, evermore moves on the face of the deep.




_THE EMPEROR'S PROGRESS._

A STUDY IN THREE STAGES.

(On the Busts of Nero in the Uffizj.)


I.


A child of brighter than the morning's birth
  And lovelier than all smiles that may be smiled
  Save only of little children undefiled,
Sweet, perfect, witless of their own dear worth,
Live rose of love, mute melody of mirth,
  Glad as a bird is when the woods are mild,
  Adorable as is nothing save a child,
Hails with wide eyes and lips his life on earth,
His lovely life with all its heaven to be.
  And whoso reads the name inscribed or hears
  Feels his own heart a frozen well of tears,
Child, for deep dread and fearful pity of thee
Whom God would not let rather die than see
  The incumbent horror of impending years.


II.

Man, that wast godlike being a child, and now,
  No less than kinglike, art no more in sooth
  For all thy grace and lordliness of youth,
The crown that bids men's branded foreheads bow
Much more has branded and bowed down thy brow
  And gnawn upon it as with fire or tooth
  Of steel or snake so sorely, that the truth
Seems here to bear false witness. Is it thou,
Child? and is all the summer of all thy spring
  This? are the smiles that drew men's kisses down
  All faded and transfigured to the frown
That grieves thy face? Art thou this weary thing?
  Then is no slave's load heavier than a crown
And such a thrall no bondman as a king.


III.

Misery, beyond all men's most miserable,
  Absolute, whole, defiant of defence,
  Inevitable, inexplacable, intense,
More vast than heaven is high, more deep than hell,
Past cure or charm of solace or of spell,
  Possesses and pervades the spirit and sense
  Whereto the expanse of the earth pays tribute; whence
Breeds evil only, and broods on fumes that swell
Rank from the blood of brother and mother and wife.
  'Misery of miseries, all is misery,' saith
The heavy fair-faced hateful head, at strife
  With its own lusts that burn with feverous breath
Lips which the loathsome bitterness of life
  Leaves fearful of the bitterness of death.




_THE RESURRECTION OF ALCILIA._

(Gratefully inscribed to Dr. A.B. Grosart.)


Sweet song-flower of the Mayspring of our song,
  Be welcome to us, with loving thanks and praise
  To his good hand who travelling on strange ways
Found thee forlorn and fragrant, lain along
Beneath dead leaves that many a winter's wrong
  Had rained and heaped through nigh three centuries' maze
  Above thy Maybloom, hiding from our gaze
The life that in thy leaves lay sweet and strong.
For thine have life, while many above thine head
Piled by the wind lie blossomless and dead.
  So now disburdened of such load above
That lay as death's own dust upon thee shed
  By days too deaf to hear thee like a dove
  Murmuring, we hear thee, bird and flower of love.




_THE FOURTEENTH OF JULY._

(On the refusal by the French Senate of the plenary amnesty
demanded by Victor Hugo, in his speech of July 3rd, for the
surviving exiles of the Commune.)


Thou shouldst have risen as never dawn yet rose,
  Day of the sunrise of the soul of France,
  Dawn of the whole world's morning, when the trance
Of all the world had end, and all its woes
Respite, prophetic of their perfect close.
  Light of all tribes of men, all names and clans,
  Dawn of the whole world's morning and of man's
Flower of the heart of morning's mystic rose,
Dawn of the very dawn of very day,
  When the sun brighter breaks night's ruinous prison,
  Thou shouldst have risen as yet no dawn has risen,
Evoked of him whose word puts night away,
  Our father, at the music of whose word
  Exile had ended, and the world had heard.

_July 5, 1880._




LAUNCH OF THE LIVADIA


Malâ soluta navis exit alite.
                         HOR.


Rigged with curses dark.
                         MILTON.




_THE LAUNCH OF THE LIVADIA._


I.

Gold, and fair marbles, and again more gold,
  And space of halls afloat that glance and gleam
  Like the green heights of sunset heaven, or seem
The golden steeps of sunrise red and cold
On deserts where dark exile keeps the fold
  Fast of the flocks of torment, where no beam
  Falls of kind light or comfort save in dream,
These we far off behold not, who behold
The cordage woven of curses, and the decks
  With mortal hate and mortal peril paven;
  From stem to stern the lines of doom engraven
That mark for sure inevitable wrecks
Those sails predestinate, though no storm vex,
  To miss on earth and find in hell their haven.


II.

All curses be about her, and all ill
  Go with her; heaven be dark above her way,
  The gulf beneath her glad and sure of prey,
And, wheresoe'er her prow be pointed, still
The winds of heaven have all one evil will
  Conspirant even as hearts of kings to slay
  With mouths of kings to lie and smile and pray,
And chiefliest his whose wintrier breath makes chill
With more than winter's and more poisonous cold
  The horror of his kingdom toward the north,
    The deserts of his kingdom toward the east.
And though death hide not in her direful hold
  Be all stars adverse toward her that come forth
    Nightly, by day all hours till all have ceased:


III.

Till all have ceased for ever, and the sum
  Be summed of all the sumless curses told
  Out on his head by all dark seasons rolled
Over its cursed and crowned existence, dumb
And blind and stark as though the snows made numb
  All sense within it, and all conscience cold,
  That hangs round hearts of less imperial mould
Like a snake feeding till their doomsday come.
O heart fast bound of frozen poison, be
All nature's as all true men's hearts to thee,
  A two-edged sword of judgment; hope be far
And fear at hand for pilot oversea
  With death for compass and despair for star,
  And the white foam a shroud for the White Czar.

_September 30, 1880._




_SIX YEARS OLD._

To H.W.M.


Between the springs of six and seven,
  Two fresh years' fountains, clear
Of all but golden sand for leaven,
  Child, midway passing here,
As earth for love's sake dares bless heaven,
  So dare I bless you, dear.

Between two bright well-heads, that brighten
  With every breath that blows
Too loud to lull, too low to frighten,
  But fain to rock, the rose,
Your feet stand fast, your lit smiles lighten,
  That might rear flowers from snows.

You came when winds unleashed were snarling
  Behind the frost-bound hours,
A snow-bird sturdier than the starling,
  A storm-bird fledged for showers,
That spring might smile to find you, darling,
  First born of all the flowers.

Could love make worthy things of worthless,
  My song were worth an ear:
Its note should make the days most mirthless
  The merriest of the year,
And wake to birth all buds yet birthless
  To keep your birthday, dear.

But where your birthday brightens heaven
  No need has earth, God knows,
Of light or warmth to melt or leaven
  The frost or fog that glows
With sevenfold heavenly lights of seven
  Sweet springs that cleave the snows.

Could love make worthy music of you,
  And match my Master's powers,
Had even my love less heart to love you,
  A better song were ours;
With all the rhymes like stars above you,
  And all the words like flowers.

_September 30, 1880._




_A PARTING SONG._

(To a friend leaving England for a year's residence in
Australia.)


        These winds and suns of spring
        That warm with breath and wing
The trembling sleep of earth, till half awake
She laughs and blushes ere her slumber break,
        For all good gifts they bring
        Require one better thing,
For all the loans of joy they lend us, borrow
One sharper dole of sorrow,
To sunder soon by half a world of sea
Her son from England and my friend from me.

        Nor hope nor love nor fear
        May speed or stay one year,
Nor song nor prayer may bid, as mine would fain,
The seasons perish and be born again,
        Restoring all we lend,
        Reluctant, of a friend,
The voice, the hand, the presence and the sight
That lend their life and light
To present gladness and heart-strengthening cheer,
Now lent again for one reluctant year.

        So much we lend indeed,
        Perforce, by force of need,
So much we must; even these things and no more
The far sea sundering and the sundered shore
        A world apart from ours,
        So much the imperious hours,
Exact, and spare not; but no more than these
All earth and all her seas
From thought and faith of trust and truth can borrow,
Not memory from desire, nor hope from sorrow.

        Through bright and dark and bright
        Returns of day and night
I bid the swift year speed and change and give
His breath of life to make the next year live
        With sunnier suns for us
        A life more prosperous,
And laugh with flowers more fragrant, that shall see
A merrier March for me,
A rosier-girdled race of night with day,
A goodlier April and a tenderer May.

        For him the inverted year
        Shall mark our seasons here
With alien alternation, and revive
This withered winter, slaying the spring alive
        With darts more sharply drawn
        As nearer draws the dawn
In heaven transfigured over earth transformed
And with our winters warmed
And wasted with our summers, till the beams
Rise on his face that rose on Dante's dreams.

        Till fourfold morning rise
        Of starshine on his eyes,
Dawn of the spheres that brand steep heaven across
At height of night with semblance of a cross
        Whose grace and ghostly glory
        Poured heaven on purgatory
Seeing with their flamelets risen all heaven grow glad
For love thereof it had
And lovely joy of loving; so may these
Make bright with welcome now their southern seas.

        O happy stars, whose mirth
        The saddest soul on earth
That ever soared and sang found strong to bless,
Lightening his life's harsh load of heaviness
        With comfort sown like seed
        In dream though not in deed
On sprinkled wastes of darkling thought divine,
Let all your lights now shine
With all as glorious gladness on his eyes
For whom indeed and not in dream they rise.

        As those great twins of air
        Hailed once with oldworld prayer
Of all folk alway faring forth by sea,
So now may these for grace and guidance be,
        To guard his sail and bring
        Again to brighten spring
The face we look for and the hand we lack
Still, till they light him back,
As welcome as to first discovering eyes
Their light rose ever, soon on his to rise.

        As parting now he goes
        From snow-time back to snows,
So back to spring from summer may next year
Restore him, and our hearts receive him here,
        The best good gift that spring
        Had ever grace to bring
At fortune's happiest hour of star-blest birth
Back to love's homebright earth,
To eyes with eyes that commune, hand with hand,
And the old warm bosom of all our mother-land.

        Earth and sea-wind and sea
        And stars and sunlight be
Alike all prosperous for him, and all hours
Have all one heart, and all that heart as ours.
        All things as good as strange
        Crown all the seasons' change
With changing flower and compensating fruit
From one year's ripening root;
Till next year bring us, roused at spring's recall,
A heartier flower and goodlier fruit than all.

_March 26, 1880._




BY THE NORTH SEA

TO WALTER THEODORE WATTS.

'We are what suns and winds and waters make us.'--LANDOR.


_Sea, wind, and sun, with light and sound and breath
  The spirit of man fulfilling--these create
  That joy wherewith man's life grown passionate
Gains heart to hear and sense to read and faith
To know the secret word our Mother saith
  In silence, and to see, though doubt wax great,
  Death as the shadow cast by life on fate,
Passing, whose shade we call the shadow of death.

Brother, to whom our Mother as to me
  Is dearer than all dreams of days undone,
This song I give you of the sovereign three
  That are as life and sleep and death are, one:
A song the sea-wind gave me from the sea,
  Where nought of man's endures before the sun._




BY THE NORTH SEA


I.

1.

A land that is lonelier than ruin;
  A sea that is stranger than death:
Far fields that a rose never blew in,
  Wan waste where the winds lack breath;
Waste endless and boundless and flowerless
  But of marsh-blossoms fruitless as free:
Where earth lies exhausted, as powerless
        To strive with the sea.

2.

Far flickers the flight of the swallows,
  Far flutters the weft of the grass
Spun dense over desolate hollows
  More pale than the clouds as they pass:
Thick woven as the weft of a witch is
  Round the heart of a thrall that hath sinned,
Whose youth and the wrecks of its riches
        Are waifs on the wind.

3.

The pastures are herdless and sheepless,
  No pasture or shelter for herds:
The wind is relentless and sleepless,
  And restless and songless the birds;
Their cries from afar fall breathless,
  Their wings are as lightnings that flee;
For the land has two lords that are deathless:
        Death's self, and the sea.

4.

These twain, as a king with his fellow,
  Hold converse of desolate speech:
And her waters are haggard and yellow
  And crass with the scurf of the beach:
And his garments are grey as the hoary
  Wan sky where the day lies dim;
And his power is to her, and his glory,
        As hers unto him.

5.

In the pride of his power she rejoices,
  In her glory he glows and is glad:
In her darkness the sound of his voice is,
  With his breath she dilates and is mad:
'If thou slay me, O death, and outlive me,
  Yet thy love hath fulfilled me of thee.'
'Shall I give thee not back if thou give me,
        O sister, O sea?'

6.

And year upon year dawns living,
  And age upon age drops dead:
And his hand is not weary of giving,
  And the thirst of her heart is not fed:
And the hunger that moans in her passion,
  And the rage in her hunger that roars,
As a wolf's that the winter lays lash on,
        Still calls and implores.

7.

Her walls have no granite for girder,
  No fortalice fronting her stands:
But reefs the bloodguiltiest of murder
  Are less than the banks of her sands:
These number their slain by the thousand;
  For the ship hath no surety to be,
When the bank is abreast of her bows and
        Aflush with the sea.

8.

No surety to stand, and no shelter
  To dawn out of darkness but one,
Out of waters that hurtle and welter
  No succour to dawn with the sun
But a rest from the wind as it passes,
  Where, hardly redeemed from the waves,
Lie thick as the blades of the grasses
        The dead in their graves.

9.

A multitude noteless of numbers,
  As wild weeds cast on an heap:
And sounder than sleep are their slumbers,
  And softer than song is their sleep;
And sweeter than all things and stranger
  The sense, if perchance it may be,
That the wind is divested of danger
        And scatheless the sea.

10.

That the roar of the banks they breasted
  Is hurtless as bellowing of herds,
And the strength of his wings that invested
  The wind, as the strength of a bird's;
As the sea-mew's might or the swallow's
  That cry to him back if he cries,
As over the graves and their hollows
        Days darken and rise.

11.

As the souls of the dead men disburdened
  And clean of the sins that they sinned,
With a lovelier than man's life guerdoned
  And delight as a wave's in the wind,
And delight as the wind's in the billow,
  Birds pass, and deride with their glee
The flesh that has dust for its pillow
        As wrecks have the sea.

12.

When the ways of the sun wax dimmer,
  Wings flash through the dusk like beams;
As the clouds in the lit sky glimmer,
  The bird in the graveyard gleams;
As the cloud at its wing's edge whitens
  When the clarions of sunrise are heard,
The graves that the bird's note brightens
        Grow bright for the bird.

13.

As the waves of the numberless waters
  That the wind cannot number who guides
Are the sons of the shore and the daughters
  Here lulled by the chime of the tides:
And here in the press of them standing
  We know not if these or if we
Live truliest, or anchored to landing
        Or drifted to sea.

14.

In the valley he named of decision
  No denser were multitudes met
When the soul of the seer in her vision
  Saw nations for doom of them set;
Saw darkness in dawn, and the splendour
  Of judgment, the sword and the rod;
But the doom here of death is more tender
        And gentler the god.

15.

And gentler the wind from the dreary
  Sea-banks by the waves overlapped,
Being weary, speaks peace to the weary
  From slopes that the tide-stream hath sapped;
And sweeter than all that we call so
  The seal of their slumber shall be
Till the graves that embosom them also
        Be sapped of the sea.


II.

1.

For the heart of the waters is cruel,
  And the kisses are dire of their lips,
And their waves are as fire is to fuel
  To the strength of the sea-faring ships,
Though the sea's eye gleam as a jewel
  To the sun's eye back as he dips.

2.

Though the sun's eye flash to the sea's
  Live light of delight and of laughter,
And her lips breathe back to the breeze
  The kiss that the wind's lips waft her
From the sun that subsides, and sees
  No gleam of the storm's dawn after.

3.

And the wastes of the wild sea-marches
  Where the borderers are matched in their might--
Bleak fens that the sun's weight parches,
  Dense waves that reject his light--
Change under the change-coloured arches
  Of changeless morning and night

4.

The waves are as ranks enrolled
  Too close for the storm to sever:
The fens lie naked and cold,
  But their heart fails utterly never:
The lists are set from of old,
  And the warfare endureth for ever.


III.

1.

Miles, and miles, and miles of desolation!
  Leagues on leagues on leagues without a change!
Sign or token of some eldest nation
  Here would make the strange land not so strange.
Time-forgotten, yea since time's creation,
  Seem these borders where the sea-birds range.

2.

Slowly, gladly, full of peace and wonder
  Grows his heart who journeys here alone.
Earth and all its thoughts of earth sink under
  Deep as deep in water sinks a stone.
Hardly knows it if the rollers thunder,
  Hardly whence the lonely wind is blown.

3.

Tall the plumage of the rush-flower tosses,
  Sharp and soft in many a curve and line
Gleam and glow the sea-coloured marsh-mosses,
  Salt and splendid from the circling brine.
Streak on streak of glimmering seashine crosses
  All the land sea-saturate as with wine.

4.

Far, and far between, in divers orders,
  Clear grey steeples cleave the low grey sky;
Fast and firm as time-unshaken warders,
  Hearts made sure by faith, by hope made high.
These alone in all the wild sea-borders
  Fear no blast of days and nights that die.

5.

All the land is like as one man's face is,
  Pale and troubled still with change of cares.
Doubt and death pervade her clouded spaces:
  Strength and length of life and peace are theirs;
Theirs alone amid these weary places.
  Seeing not how the wild world frets and fares.

6.

Firm and fast where all is cloud that changes
  Cloud-clogged sunlight, cloud by sunlight thinned,
Stern and sweet, above the sand-hill ranges
  Watch the towers and tombs of men that sinned
Once, now calm as earth whose only change is
  Wind, and light, and wind, and cloud, and wind.

7.

Out and in and out the sharp straits wander,
  In and out and in the wild way strives,
Starred and paved and lined with flowers that squander
  Gold as golden as the gold of hives,
Salt and moist and multiform: but yonder,
  See, what sign of life or death survives?

8.

Seen then only when the songs of olden
  Harps were young whose echoes yet endure,
Hymned of Homer when his years were golden,
  Known of only when the world was pure,
Here is Hades, manifest, beholden,
  Surely, surely here, if aught be sure!

9.

Where the border-line was crossed, that, sundering
  Death from life, keeps weariness from rest,
None can tell, who fares here forward wondering;
  None may doubt but here might end his quest.
Here life's lightning joys and woes once thundering
  Sea-like round him cease like storm suppressed.

10.

Here the wise wave-wandering steadfast-hearted
  Guest of many a lord of many a land
Saw the shape or shade of years departed,
  Saw the semblance risen and hard at hand,
Saw the mother long from love's reach parted,
  Anticleia, like a statue stand.

11.

Statue? nay, nor tissued image woven
  Fair on hangings in his father's hall;
Nay, too fast her faith of heart was proven,
  Far too firm her loveliest love of all;
Love wherethrough the loving heart was cloven,
  Love that hears not when the loud Fates call.

12.

Love that lives and stands up re-created
  Then when life has ebbed and anguish fled;
Love more strong than death or all things fated,
  Child's and mother's, lit by love and led;
Love that found what life so long awaited
  Here, when life came down among the dead.

13.

Here, where never came alive another,
  Came her son across the sundering tide
Crossed before by many a warrior brother
  Once that warred on Ilion at his side;
Here spread forth vain hands to clasp the mother
  Dead, that sorrowing for his love's sake died.

14.

Parted, though by narrowest of divisions,
  Clasp he might not, only might implore,
Sundered yet by bitterest of derisions,
  Son, and mother from the son she bore--
Here? But all dispeopled here of visions
  Lies, forlorn of shadows even, the shore.

15.

All too sweet such men's Hellenic speech is,
  All too fain they lived of light to see,
Once to see the darkness of these beaches,
  Once to sing this Hades found of me
Ghostless, all its gulfs and creeks and reaches,
  Sky, and shore, and cloud, and waste, and sea.


IV.

1.

But aloft and afront of me faring
  Far forward as folk in a dream
That strive, between doubting and daring
  Right on till the goal for them gleam,
Full forth till their goal on them lighten,
  The harbour where fain they would be,
What headlands there darken and brighten?
    What change in the sea?

2.

What houses and woodlands that nestle
  Safe inland to lee of the hill
As it slopes from the headlands that wrestle
  And succumb to the strong sea's will?
Truce is not, nor respite, nor pity,
  For the battle is waged not of hands
Where over the grave of a city
    The ghost of it stands.

3.

Where the wings of the sea-wind slacken,
  Green lawns to the landward thrive,
Fields brighten and pine-woods blacken,
  And the heat in their heart is alive;
They blossom and warble and murmur,
  For the sense of their spirit is free:
But harder to shoreward and firmer
    The grasp of the sea.

4.

Like ashes the low cliffs crumble,
  The banks drop down into dust,
The heights of the hills are made humble,
  As a reed's is the strength of their trust:
As a city's that armies environ,
  The strength of their stay is of sand:
But the grasp of the sea is as iron,
    Laid hard on the land.

5.

A land that is thirstier than ruin;
  A sea that is hungrier than death;
Heaped hills that a tree never grew in;
  Wide sands where the wave draws breath;
All solace is here for the spirit
  That ever for ever may be
For the soul of thy son to inherit,
    My mother, my sea.

6.

O delight of the headlands and beaches!
  O desire of the wind on the wold,
More glad than a man's when it reaches
  That end which it sought from of old
And the palm of possession is dreary
  To the sense that in search of it sinned;
But nor satisfied ever nor weary
    Is ever the wind.

7.

The delight that he takes but in living
  Is more than of all things that live:
For the world that has all things for giving
  Has nothing so goodly to give:
But more than delight his desire is,
  For the goal where his pinions would be
Is immortal as air or as fire is,
    Immense as the sea.

8.

Though hence come the moan that he borrows
  From darkness and depth of the night,
Though hence be the spring of his sorrows,
  Hence too is the joy of his might;
The delight that his doom is for ever
  To seek and desire and rejoice,
And the sense that eternity never
    Shall silence his voice.

9.

That satiety never may stifle
  Nor weariness ever estrange
Nor time be so strong as to rifle
  Nor change be so great as to change
His gift that renews in the giving.
  The joy that exalts him to be
Alone of all elements living
    The lord of the sea.

10.

What is fire, that its flame should consume her?
  More fierce than all fires are her waves:
What is earth, that its gulfs should entomb her?
  More deep are her own than their graves.
Life shrinks from his pinions that cover
  The darkness by thunders bedinned:
But she knows him, her lord and her lover,
    The godhead of wind.

11.

For a season his wings are about her,
  His breath on her lips for a space;
Such rapture he wins not without her
  In the width of his worldwide race.
Though the forests bow down, and the mountains
  Wax dark, and the tribes of them flee,
His delight is more deep in the fountains
      And springs of the sea.

12.

There are those too of mortals that love him,
  There are souls that desire and require,
Be the glories of midnight above him
  Or beneath him the daysprings of fire:
And their hearts are as harps that approve him
  And praise him as chords of a lyre
That were fain with their music to move him
      To meet their desire.

13.

To descend through the darkness to grace them,
  Till darkness were lovelier than light:
To encompass and grasp and embrace them,
  Till their weakness were one with his might:
With the strength of his wings to caress them,
  With the blast of his breath to set free;
With the mouths of his thunders to bless them
      For sons of the sea.

14.

For these have the toil and the guerdon
  That the wind has eternally: these
Have part in the boon and the burden
  Of the sleepless unsatisfied breeze,
That finds not, but seeking rejoices
  That possession can work him no wrong:
And the voice at the heart of their voice is
      The sense of his song.

15.

For the wind's is their doom and their blessing;
  To desire, and have always above
A possession beyond their possessing,
  A love beyond reach of their love.
Green earth has her sons and her daughters,
  And these have their guerdons; but we
Are the wind's and the sun's and the water's,
      Elect of the sea.


V.

1.

For the sea too seeks and rejoices,
  Gains and loses and gains,
And the joy of her heart's own choice is
  As ours, and as ours are her pains:
As the thoughts of our hearts are her voices,
  And as hers is the pulse of our veins.

2.

Her fields that know not of dearth
  Nor lie for their fruit's sake fallow
Laugh large in the depth of their mirth
  But inshore here in the shallow,
Embroiled with encumbrance of earth,
  Their skirts are turbid and yellow.

3.

The grime of her greed is upon her,
  The sign of her deed is her soil;
As the earth's is her own dishonour,
  And corruption the crown of her toil:
She hath spoiled and devoured, and her honour
  Is this, to be shamed by her spoil.

4.

But afar where pollution is none,
  Nor ensign of strife nor endeavour,
Where her heart and the sun's are one,
  And the soil of her sin comes never,
She is pure as the wind and the sun,
  And her sweetness endureth for ever.


VI.

1.

Death, and change, and darkness everlasting,
  Deaf, that hears not what the daystar saith,
Blind, past all remembrance and forecasting,
  Dead, past memory that it once drew breath;
These, above the washing tides and wasting,
  Reign, and rule this land of utter death.

2.

Change of change, darkness of darkness, hidden,
  Very death of very death, begun
When none knows,--the knowledge is forbidden--
  Self-begotten, self-proceeding, one,
Born, not made--abhorred, unchained, unchidden,
  Night stands here defiant of the sun.

3.

Change of change, and death of death begotten,
  Darkness born of darkness, one and three,
Ghostly godhead of a world forgotten,
  Crowned with heaven, enthroned on land and sea,
Here, where earth with dead men's bones is rotten,
  God of Time, thy likeness worships thee.

4.

Lo, thy likeness of thy desolation,
  Shape and figure of thy might, O Lord,
Formless form, incarnate miscreation,
  Served of all things living and abhorred;
Earth herself is here thine incarnation,
  Time, of all things born on earth adored.

5.

All that worship thee are fearful of thee;
  No man may not worship thee for fear:
Prayers nor curses prove not nor disprove thee,
  Move nor change thee with our change of cheer:
All at last, though all abhorred thee, love thee,
  God, the sceptre of whose throne is here.

6.

Here thy throne and sceptre of thy station,
  Here the palace paven for thy feet;
Here thy sign from nation unto nation
  Passed as watchword for thy guards to greet,
Guards that go before thine exaltation,
  Ages, clothed with bitter years and sweet.

7.

Here, where sharp the sea-bird shrills his ditty,
  Flickering flame-wise through the clear live calm,
Rose triumphal, crowning all a city,
  Roofs exalted once with prayer and psalm,
Built of holy hands for holy pity,
  Frank and fruitful as a sheltering palm.

8.

Church and hospice wrought in faultless fashion,
  Hall and chancel bounteous and sublime,
Wide and sweet and glorious as compassion,
  Filled and thrilled with force of choral chime,
Filled with spirit of prayer and thrilled with passion
  Hailed a God more merciful than Time.

9.

Ah, less mighty, less than Time prevailing,
  Shrunk, expelled, made nothing at his nod,
Less than clouds across the sea-line sailing,
  Lies he, stricken by his master's rod.
'Where is man?' the cloister murmurs wailing;
  Back the mute shrine thunders--'Where is God?'

10.

Here is all the end of all his glory--
  Dust, and grass, and barren silent stones.
Dead, like him, one hollow tower and hoary
  Naked in the sea-wind stands and moans,
Filled and thrilled with its perpetual story:
  Here, where earth is dense with dead men's bones.

11.

Low and loud and long, a voice for ever,
  Sounds the wind's clear story like a song.
Tomb from tomb the waves devouring sever,
  Dust from dust as years relapse along;
Graves where men made sure to rest, and never
  Lie dismantled by the seasons' wrong.

12.

Now displaced, devoured and desecrated,
  Now by Time's hands darkly disinterred,
These poor dead that sleeping here awaited
  Long the archangel's re-creating word,
Closed about with roofs and walls high-gated
  Till the blast of judgment should be heard,

13.

Naked, shamed, cast out of consecration,
  Corpse and coffin, yea the very graves,
Scoffed at, scattered, shaken from their station,
  Spurned and scourged of wind and sea like slaves,
Desolate beyond man's desolation,
  Shrink and sink into the waste of waves.

14.

Tombs, with bare white piteous bones protruded,
  Shroudless, down the loose collapsing banks,
Crumble, from their constant place detruded,
  That the sea devours and gives not thanks.
Graves where hope and prayer and sorrow brooded
  Gape and slide and perish, ranks on ranks.

15.

Rows on rows and line by line they crumble,
  They that thought for all time through to be.
Scarce a stone whereon a child might stumble
  Breaks the grim field paced alone of me.
Earth, and man, and all their gods wax humble
  Here, where Time brings pasture to the sea.


VII.

1.

But afar on the headland exalted,
  But beyond in the curl of the bay,
From the depth of his dome deep-vaulted
  Our father is lord of the day.
Our father and lord that we follow,
  For deathless and ageless is he;
And his robe is the whole sky's hollow,
    His sandal the sea.

2.

Where the horn of the headland is sharper,
  And her green floor glitters with fire,
The sea has the sun for a harper,
  The sun has the sea for a lyre.
The waves are a pavement of amber,
  By the feet of the sea-winds trod
To receive in a god's presence-chamber
    Our father, the God.

3.

Time, haggard and changeful and hoary,
  Is master and God of the land:
But the air is fulfilled of the glory
  That is shed from our lord's right hand.
O father of all of us ever,
  All glory be only to thee
From heaven, that is void of thee never,
    And earth, and the sea.

4.

O Sun, whereof all is beholden,
  Behold now the shadow of this death,
This place of the sepulchres, olden
  And emptied and vain as a breath.
The bloom of the bountiful heather
  Laughs broadly beyond in thy light
As dawn, with her glories to gather,
    At darkness and night.

5.

Though the Gods of the night lie rotten
  And their honour be taken away
And the noise of their names forgotten,
  Thou, Lord, art God of the day.
Thou art father and saviour and spirit,
  O Sun, of the soul that is free
And hath grace of thy grace to inherit
    Thine earth and thy sea.

6.

The hills and the sands and the beaches,
  The waters adrift and afar,
The banks and the creeks and the reaches,
  How glad of thee all these are!
The flowers, overflowing, overcrowded,
  Are drunk with the mad wind's mirth:
The delight of thy coming unclouded
    Makes music of earth.

7.

I, last least voice of her voices,
  Give thanks that were mute in me long
To the soul in my soul that rejoices
  For the song that is over my song.
Time gives what he gains for the giving
  Or takes for his tribute of me;
My dreams to the wind everliving,
    My song to the sea.




_Spottiswoode & Co., Printers, New-street Square, London._






End of Project Gutenberg's Studies in Song, by Algernon Charles Swinburne

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK STUDIES IN SONG ***

***** This file should be named 16973-8.txt or 16973-8.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/1/6/9/7/16973/

Produced by Thierry Alberto, Annika Feilbach and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

*** END: FULL LICENSE ***
